# Spells

## Absorbing Touch

**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S

**Range** touch

**Target** object touched

**Duration** 1 day/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (object); **Spell Resistance**
  no

You absorb the next object your hand touches into your body. If
you are already holding an object, you can attempt to absorb it;
otherwise, you may touch an object as a standard action separate
from casting the spell. You can absorb any nonmagical, nonliving
object weighing no more than 1 pound per caster level. A
container and its contents count as a single object. Objects in
the possession of another creature receive a Fortitude saving
throw to prevent absorption. You may continue to attempt to
absorb objects until one is absorbed.

An absorbed object melds with your hand and cannot be targeted,
but the object's weight still counts against your carrying
capacity. If you dismiss the spell, the item appears in the hand
that absorbed it, or falls to the ground if that hand is
full. Multiple castings let you absorb additional items, but you
can only store a single item per hand.



## Accelerate Poison


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 2, ranger 2,
  sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a thorn)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You hasten the onset of poison in the target. If the poison
normally has an onset time, its effects begin immediately. If the
poison has no onset time, its frequency is doubled, requiring two
saving throws and inflicting damage twice per round or minute,
though its duration is halved. *[Accelerate poison]* does not
change the cure condition for the poison. If the target is
affected by more than one poison, you may choose which is
affected if you administered the poison; otherwise, randomly
determine which poison is affected.



## Acid Pit


**School** conjuration (creation) [acid]; **Level**
sorcerer/wizard 4, summoner 4

**Components** V, S, M (drop of acid), F (Fine shovel worth 10
  gp)

**Saving Throw** Reflex negates; see text; **Spell Resistance**
  no

This spell functions as *[create pit]*, except that it places a
5-foot-deep pool of acid at the bottom of the pit. The pit has a
maximum depth of 100 feet. Creatures who fall into the pit take
falling damage as normal (the acid counts as a yielding surface),
plus 2d6 points of acid damage per round spent in contact with
the acid. In addition, exposed items carried by a creature in the
pit may be harmed. Refer to Table 9-2: Items Affected by Magical
Attacks (*Core Rulebook* 216). Items are affected one at a time
in the order listed on the table, and must make Fortitude saves
after 3 consecutive rounds in the acid or gain the broken
condition. Objects with the broken condition (regardless of how
they became broken) must make a Fortitude saving throw each round
spent within the acid or be destroyed. The walls of the pit are
quite slippery and have a [Climb] DC of 30.



## Alchemical Allocation


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round

This extract causes a pale aura to emanate from your mouth. If
you consume a potion or elixir on the round following the
consumption of this extract, you can spit it back into its
container as a free action.  You gain all the benefits of the
potion or elixir, but it is not consumed. You can only gain the
benefits of one potion or elixir in this way per use of this
extract.



## Allfood


**School** transmutation; **Level** ranger 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a pinch of salt and pepper)

**Range** touch

**Target** object touched, weighing up to 5 lbs./level

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will negates (object); **Spell Resistance** yes
(object)

You can transform one object, weighing up to 5 lbs. per caster
level, into an edible substance that any living creature can
chew, swallow, and safely digest. This *[allfood]* always has a
bland taste and slightly gooey consistency when chewed regardless
of its original nature. One pound of *[allfood]* provides enough
sustenance to support a Medium creature for an entire day.

Objects of similar nature in close proximity, such as a pile of
rocks, count as a single object for the purpose of this
spell. You cannot use this spell to transform objects with
magical or other exceptional qualities. An object's hardness is
considered to be 0 for the purposes of eating it, but it retains
its normal hardness for all other situations, and becomes no more
vulnerable to sunder attacks, break attempts, or any other action
typically directed against objects.  Objects such as hot coals or
a burning torch continue to produce energy even after you
transform them into *[allfood]* and if a creature attempts to eat
such an object, it takes damage accordingly.



## Alter Winds


**School** transmutation [air]; **Level** druid 1,
  sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 minute

**Components** V, S

**Range** touch

**Area** immobile 10-ft.-radius emanation

**Duration** 1 hour/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You subtly enhance or diminish the effects of natural winds
within the spell's area, which is an immobile emanation around a
point touched by you as the spell is cast. Within the area,
natural (but not magical) wind effects are either increased or
decreased by one step in intensity (*Core Rulebook* 439). The
maximum wind force you can affect with this spell is based on
your caster level, as shown on the table below.  *[Alter winds]*
has no effect on magical wind effects.

  Caster Level     Wind Force
  ---------------- ------------
  1st-3rd          Light
  4th-9th          Moderate
  10th-15th        Strong
  16th or higher   Severe



## Amplify Elixir


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level

This extract greatly enhances the effects of any potion or elixir
you consume. For the duration of this extract, any potion or
elixir you consume is treated as if it were empowered. Increase
all variable numeric effects of the potion or elixir by half. If
the potion or elixir does not have any variable numeric effects,
it is instead treated as if it were extended (double the duration
of the potion or elixir). If the potion or elixir does not have
any variable numeric effects, or has an instantaneous duration,
*[amplify elixir]* has no effect. *[Amplify elixir]* affects oils
that target you, but it has no effect on oils that target your
equipment.



## Ant Haul


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 1, cleric 1, druid
1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1, summoner 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a small pulley)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 2 hours/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

The target's [carrying capacity] triples. This does not affect
the creature's actual Strength in any way, merely the amount of
material it can carry while benefiting from this spell. It also
has no effect on encumbrance due to armor. If the creature wears
armor it still takes the normal penalties for doing so regardless
of how much weight the spell allows it to carry.



## Aqueous Orb


**School** conjuration (creation) [water]; **Level** druid 3,
sorcerer/wizard 3, summoner 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a drop of water and a glass bead)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect** 10-ft.-diameter sphere

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Reflex negates; **Spell Resistance** no

You create a rolling sphere of churning water that can engulf
those it strikes. The *[aqueous orb]* can move up to 30 feet per
round, rolling over barriers less than 10 feet tall. It
automatically quenches any nonmagical fires and functions as
*[dispel magic]* against magical fires as long as those fires are
size Large or less.

Any creature in the path of the *[aqueous orb]* takes 2d6 points
of nonlethal damage. A successful Reflex save negates this
damage, but a large or smaller creature that fails its save must
make a second save or be engulfed by the *[aqueous orb]* and
carried along with it. Engulfed creatures are immersed in water
and must hold their breath unless capable of breathing
water. They gain cover against attacks from outside the *[aqueous
orb]* but are considered entangled by its churning currents,
takes 2d6 points of nonlethal damage at the beginning of their
turn each round they remain trapped. Creatures within the orb may
attempt a new Reflex save each round to escape into a random
square adjacent to the *[aqueous orb]*. The orb may hold one
Large creature, 4 Medium, or 16 Small or smaller creatures within
it.

The sphere moves as long as you actively direct it (a move action
for you); otherwise, it merely stays at rest and churns in
place. An *[aqueous orb]* stops if it moves outside the spell's
range.



## Arcane Concordance


**School** evocation; **Level** bard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a spent wand)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Area** 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance** no

A shimmering, blue and gold radiance surrounds you, enhancing
arcane spells cast by your allies within its area. Any arcane
spell cast by a creature within the area gains a +1 enhancement
bonus to the DC of any saving throws against the spell, and can
be cast as if one of the following metamagic feats was applied to
it (without increasing the spell level or casting time): [Enlarge
Spell], [Extend Spell], [Silent Spell], or [Still Spell] (you
choose the metamagic feat when you cast *[arcane concordance].



## Arrow Eruption


**School** conjuration (creation); **Level** ranger 2,
  sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (arrow or crossbow bolt)

**Range** long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Area** 30-ft.-radius burst

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You create exact duplicates of the arrow or crossbow bolt you
used to kill a creature in the previous round and launch one at
enemy creatures within a 30-foot radius of the corpse. You can
target one creature per caster level (maximum 15) within range of
the burst and must make a single attack roll and apply it to each
arrow. These duplicate arrows possess all the intrinsic magical
properties of the arrow that killed the original creature as well
as those passed on to it by your bow. They also enjoy the full
benefit of any bonuses or modifiers you applied to the attack
from other magical items, feats, and class or racial
features. However, this spell cannot reproduce any spells or
other limited-use magical effects that you used to enhance that
particular attack. This includes such effects as the *[true
strike]* spell, as well as any area spell you might have placed
on the arrow by means of the arcane archer's imbue arrow class
feature.



## Aspect of the Bear


**School**transmutation (polymorph); **Level** druid 2, ranger 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

You take on an aspect of a bear. You gain a +2 enhancement bonus
to natural armor and a +2 enhancement bonus on CMB rolls. You can
also perform bull rush, grapple, and overrun combat maneuvers
without provoking attacks of opportunity.



## Aspect of the Falcon


**School**transmutation (polymorph); **Level** druid 1, ranger 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

You take on an aspect of a falcon. Your eyes become wide and
raptor-like, and you grow feathers on the sides of your head. You
gain a +3 competence bonus on [Perception] checks, a +1
competence bonus on ranged attacks, and the critical multiplier
for your bows and crossbows becomes 19-20/x3. This effect does
not stack with any other effect that expands the threat range of
a weapon, such as the [Improved Critical] feat or a *[keen]*
weapon.



## Aspect of the Stag


**School**transmutation (polymorph); **Level** druid 4, ranger 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

When you cast this spell, you take on an aspect of a stag,
including some of its physical characteristics. Your features
become elongated and sinewy, and you grow a set of antlers you
can use for defense. You gain a +2 dodge bonus to AC against
attacks of opportunity, your base speed increases by 20 ft., you
can move through any undergrowth (including magically manipulated
undergrowth) at your normal speed, and can even make a 5-foot
step within such terrain. Furthermore, when you are hit with an
attack of opportunity, you can make a single attack with your
antlers against the opponent that hit you as an immediate
action. This attack uses your highest base attack bonus plus your
Strength or Dexterity bonus (your choice) and deals 1d8 points of
piercing damage (if you are Medium; 1d6 points of damage if
Small) plus your Strength modifier on a successful hit. The
antlers have a critical multiplier of 19-20/x2.



## Aspect of the Wolf


**School**transmutation (polymorph); **Level** druid 5, ranger 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

When you cast this spell, you take on an aspect of a wolf,
including some of its physical characteristics. You become more
rugged, your ears become elongated, and you sprout sharp fangs
and fur. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength and
Dexterity, the scent ability, a +2 enhancement bonus on trip
attacks, and can make a trip combat maneuver as a swift
action. This trip attack does not provoke attacks of opportunity.



## Aura of Greater Courage


**School** abjuration; **Level** paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Area**10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you

**Duration** 10 minutes/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

When you cast this spell you strengthen your paladin's aura of
courage.  Until the end of its duration, all allies within that
aura are immune to fear (magical or otherwise). If you do not
have the aura of courage class feature, *[aura of greater
courage]* has no effect.



## Ball Lightning


**School** evocation [air, electricity]; **Level** druid 4,
sorcerer/wizard 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a small iron ring)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect** two or more 5-ft.-diameter spheres

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Reflex negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You create two globes of lightning that fly in whichever
direction you indicate. For every 4 caster levels above 7th, you
create an additional globe of lightning (3 globes at 11th, 4
globes at 15th, to the maximum of 5 globes at 19th). These globes
fly at a rate of 20 feet per round and have perfect
maneuverability. Wind does not affect a flying sphere's course.

If a globe enters a space with a creature, it stops moving for
the round and deals 3d6 points of electricity damage to that
creature, though a successful Reflex save negates the
damage. Creatures wearing metal armor take a -4 penalty on this
saving throw.

Each globe moves as long as you actively direct it (it's a move
action for you to direct all the spheres created by a single
casting of this spell); otherwise they stay at rest. These globes
have no mass and cannot push aside unwilling creatures or move
solid objects. A *[ball lightning]* globe winks out if it exceeds
the spell's range.



## Banish Seeming


**School** abjuration; **Level** inquisitor 3, witch 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a cold iron nail)

**Range** touch

**Target** one creature or object

**Duration** instantaneous and 1 round/level; see text

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

With a melee touch attack you can dispel an illusion or return a
creature to its natural form. This functions as *[dispel magic]*
directed at the effect in question, except you receive a +2
enhancement bonus on your dispel check and you can only dispel
illusions or changes in form created by supernatural effects or
spells. If multiple effects are changing the creature's
appearance, you can dispel one such effect for every four caster
levels you possess, starting with the highest caster level spells
and proceeding to spells with lower caster levels. The caster
level for supernatural abilities such as change shape is equal to
the target creature's Hit Dice. A creature returned to its
natural form by *[banish seeming]* is prevented from changing its
form again for a number of rounds equal to your caster level.

*[Banish seeming]* has no effect on nonmagical means of changing
appearance, such as that provided by a disguise or extraordinary
ability.



## Bard's Escape


**School** conjuration (teleportation); **Level** bard 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (pieces of a smashed fiddle)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** you and up to 1 willing creature/2 caster levels, no
two of which can be more than 30 ft. apart

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance** no

You whisk yourself and willing allies out of a tight jam, or
instantly transfer yourselves to another location to achieve
greater strategic positioning. You can move any allies within
range to any other space of your choosing within range. Those
spaces need not be in line of sight or line of effect from your
original position, but must be open locations on surfaces able to
support the creatures teleported. Except as noted above, this
spell otherwise functions as *[dimension door]*.



## Beguiling Gift


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
bard 1, witch 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, F (the object to be offered)

**Range** 5 ft.

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You offer an object to an adjacent creature, and entice it into
using or consuming the proffered item. If the target fails its
Will save, it immediately takes the offered object, dropping an
already held object if necessary. On its next turn, it consumes
or dons the object, as appropriate for the item in question. For
example, an apple would be eaten, a potion consumed, a ring put
on a finger, and a sword wielded in a free hand. If the target is
physically unable to accept the object, the spell fails. The
subject is under no obligation to continue consuming or using the
item once the spell's duration has expired, although it may find
a cursed item difficult to be rid of.



## Bestow Grace


**School** abjuration; **Level** paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** one good creature touched

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw**Will (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes
  (harmless)

With this spell you can bestow your divine grace on another good
creature for a short amount of time, infusing that creature with
a portion of your holy virtue. When you touch the subject, you
grant that creature a sacred bonus to its saving throws equal to
its Charisma bonus (if any) on all saving throws.



## Blaze of Glory


**School** conjuration (healing) [good, mind-affecting];
**Level** paladin 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action or immediate action; see text

**Components** V

**Area** 30-ft.-radius burst centered on you

**Duration** instantaneous and 1 round/level; see text

**Saving Throw** Will partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

You fall unconscious but also unleash a spectacular wave of holy
energy that heartens and heals your allies while leaving your
opponents daunted and damaged. You can cast this spell as either
a standard action on your turn, or as an immediate action when
brought to below 0 hit points. If cast as a standard action, you
are immediately reduced to -1 hit points, but stable, after
casting the spell.

When you cast this spell, any good creature within range is
healed for 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels. All evil
creatures within range take the same amount as damage instead (a
successful Will save halves this damage). In addition, all allies
and enemies within range are affected as if by the *[prayer]*
spell for 1 round per caster level.



## Blessing of Courage and Life


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** cleric 2, paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** 1 minute/level (see below)

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes
(harmless)

With this prayer you provide long-lasting succor to a wounded
creature.  For as long as the effect lasts, the target receives a
+2 morale bonus on saving throws against fear and death
effects. At any time while the spell is in effect, the target can
choose to end the spell as a swift action for a burst of healing
energy. The target loses the saving throw bonus, but is healed of
1d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10).



## Blessing of Fervor


**School** transmutation; **Level** cleric 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets** one creature/level, no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

With this blessing, you call your allies to move forth and
empower them to conquer and become victorious. Each round for the
duration of this spell, each of your allies can choose one of the
following bonuses for that round at the beginning of its turn
(their choice).

- Increase its speed by 30 feet.
- Stand up as a swift action without provoking an attack of
    opportunity.
- Make one extra attack as part of a full attack action, using
    its highest base attack bonus.
- Gain a +2 bonus on attack rolls and a +2 dodge bonus to AC and
    Reflex saves.
- Cast a single spell of 2nd level or lower as if it were an
    enlarged, extended, silent, or still spell.

These effects are not cumulative with similar effects, such as
those provided by *[haste]* or a *[speed]* weapon, nor do they
actually grant an extra action, so you can't use it to cast a
second spell or otherwise take an extra action in the
round. *[Blessing of fervor]* does not stack with *[haste]*.



## Blessing of the Salamander


**School** transmutation (polymorph); **Level** druid 5, ranger 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target**creature touched

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

When you cast this on a creature, its skin turns slick and clammy
and it is able to regenerate damage each round. While under the
effects of the spell, the creature gains fast healing 5, fire
resistance 20 and a +2 competence bonus to its Combat Maneuver
Defense.



## Blood Biography


**School** divination; **Level** bard 2, cleric 3, inquisitor 3,
sorcerer/wizard 3

**Casting Time** 1 minute

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a scrap of parchment)

**Range** touch

**Target** one creature's blood or one bloodstain

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will negates (see text); **Spell Resistance** no

You learn the answers to a specific set of questions about a
creature so long as you have access to at least one drop of its
blood. You can cast this spell on the blood of the living or the
dead, but living or undead creatures are entitled to a saving
throw to resist the spell. You can cast the spell on dried or
fresh blood. Once you cast the spell the answers to the following
four questions appear on any flat surface you designate (a wall,
a piece of paper, and so on).

- Who are you? (The name by which the creature is most commonly
    known)
- What are you? (Gender, race, profession/role)
- How was your blood shed? (Brief outline of the events that
    caused its wound, to the best of the victim's knowledge)
- When was your blood shed?

These answers always appear in a language you can read even if
the creature cannot speak that or any language.



## Bloodhound


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 3, inquisitor 2,
  ranger 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a drop of blood and a pinch of cinnamon)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 hour/level

You gain the scent special quality, including the ability to
track by scent. You receive a +8 competence bonus on [Perception]
checks involving smell and a +4 competence bonus on [Survival]
checks to track using scent. You take a -4 penalty on saving
throws against odor-related effects such as the stench ability
and *[stinking cloud]*. A creature under the effects of
*[bloodhound]* can detect poison by scent with a DC 20
[Perception] check.



## Bloody Claws


**School** necromancy; **Level** druid 4, ranger 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** living creature touched

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You give a creature the ability to deal bleed damage when making
natural attacks so long as the attack deals slashing or piercing
damage. This bleed damage for each attack is equal to one-half
your caster level (limited to the creature's maximum damage with
that attack), though bleed damage does not stack. When two or
more attacks deal bleed damage, take the worse effect.



## Bomber's Eye


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level

This extract allows you to throw weapons farther and more
accurately.  While this extract is in effect, increase the range
of any thrown weapon by 10 feet. In addition, you receive a +1
insight bonus on attack rolls made with thrown weapons.



## Borrow Fortune


**School** evocation; **Level** oracle 3

**Casting Time** 1 immediate action

**Components** V

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** instantaneous; see text

When you make a d20 roll, you may choose to immediately cast this
spell to reroll that die before success or failure is known,
keeping the more favorable result. For the next two rounds
following your casting of the spell, you must roll two dice each
time a d20 roll is called for, keeping the less favorable result.



## Borrow Skill


**School**transmutation; **Level**bard 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**S

**Range**touch

**Target**creature touched

**Duration**up to 1 round/level (see description)

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**yes
(harmless)

You borrow one of the target's known skills. After touching the
subject, you can make a single check with the chosen skill using
the subject's skill ranks, but modified by your own key
ability. If you take longer than the spell's duration to make the
check or the check requires more time, then it fails and you must
use your own skill ranks (if any). If the borrowed skill is a
class skill for you, you gain the +3 bonus on checks using that
skill.



## Bow Spirit


**School** conjuration (creation); **Level** ranger 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target**you

**Duration** 1 round/level

A *[bow spirit]* is a shapeless force that hovers about you,
taking ammunition from your quiver and firing it. For as long as
the *[bow spirit]* lasts, you can spend a swift action to direct
the *[bow spirit]* to fire an arrow or a bolt at a target of your
choice, as if the *[bow spirit]* were firing the necessary ranged
weapon. The *[bow spirit] uses* your base attack bonus plus your
Dexterity modifier, as well as any bonuses and effects from feats
you have that affect ranged attacks, or bonuses from the
ammunition it uses. A *[bow spirit]*'s attacks do not provoke
attacks of opportunity. There must be ammunition available for
the *[bow spirit]* to use, and it expends ammunition as if used
by you.

A *[bow spirit]* occupies your space, and moves with you.  It
cannot be attacked or harmed by physical attacks, but *[dispel
magic]*, *[disintegrate]*, a *sphere of annihilation*, or a *[rod
of cancellation]* affects it. A *[bow spirit]*'s AC against touch
attacks is 10 + your Dexterity modifier.



## Brand


**School** transmutation; **Level** inquisitor 0

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 1 day/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

*[Brand]* etches an indelible rune or mark of no more than 6
characters onto a creature, inflicting 1 point of damage. The
mark may be placed on any exposed portion of the creature,
typically the head or forearm. A *[brand]* can be hidden by
clothing or removed by scraping it away (causing 1d6 points of
damage), though the


## *[brand]* returns if the damage is healed.


**School** transmutation; **Level** inquisitor 4

**Casting Time** 1 round

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** permanent

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

This spell functions like *[brand]*, except that it inflicts 1d6
points of damage when applied and cannot be removed, even
temporarily.  In addition, a *[greater brand]* blazes as bright
as a torch when brought within 30 feet of a visible symbol of
your faith.  While the symbol is blazing, the recipient is
sickened. Like the effects of *[bestow curse]*, a *[greater
brand]* cannot be dispelled, but it can be removed by any means
that removes a *[mark of justice]*.



## Break


**School** transmutation; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a twig)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one Medium or smaller object

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (object); **Spell Resistance**
yes (object)

You can attempt to break or at least damage any one Medium or
smaller object within range. If the target fails its Fortitude
saving throw, it gains the broken condition. If cast on a broken
item, that item is destroyed on a failed save.



## Brilliant Inspiration


**School** evocation [language-dependent]; **Level** bard 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** 1 round/level and special (see below)

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes
(harmless)

You open a link between your mind and the subject's mind, giving
advice and encouragement for as long as the spell is in
effect. Each time the subject of the spell makes an attack roll,
ability check, or skill check, it rolls two d20s and takes the
better result. If any roll is a natural 20, the spell's effect
ends—your brilliant advice is spent.



## Bristle


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
  Resistance** yes

You give a creature the ability to redirect a portion of its
innate toughness away from its own defense and toward the amount
of damage it deals with natural attacks. Each round, as a swift
action at the start of its turn, the creature can choose to
reduce some or all of its natural armor bonus to AC and gain an
enhancement bonus on all damage rolls for natural attacks equal
to that amount. The reduction to natural armor, and thus the
enhancement bonus on damage rolls, cannot exceed 1 point per 3
caster levels, to a maximum penalty/bonus of -5/+5 at 15th
level. A creature cannot reduce its natural armor bonus to less
than 0 with this spell. All attacks directed against the creature
use its adjusted AC until the start of its next turn, at which
time it can choose to modify its AC again or keep it at its
current level. Creatures make this decision without any need for
conscious thought or reflection; even creatures with no
Intelligence score can benefit from this spell, although they
always opt for the maximum possible reduction and bonus,
regardless of any tactical advantage they might lose.



## Burning Gaze


**School** evocation [fire]; **Level** druid 2, sorcerer/wizard
2, witch 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (eye of a mundane salamander)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (see text); **Spell
  Resistance** yes

Your eyes burn like hot coals, allowing you to set objects or
foes alight with a glance.

As a standard action as long as this spell's effects persist, you
may direct your *[burning gaze]* against a single creature or
object within 30 feet of your location. Targeted creatures must
succeed at a Fortitude save or take 1d6 points of fire
damage. Unattended objects do not get a save. Creatures damaged
by the spell must make a Reflex save or catch fire. Each round,
burning creatures may attempt a Reflex save to quench the flames;
failure results in another 1d6 points of fire damage. Flammable
items worn by a creature must also save or take the same damage
as the creature. If a creature or object is already on fire, it
suffers no additional effects from *[burning gaze]*.

Note that this spell does not grant an actual gaze attack—foes
and allies are not in danger of catching on fire simply by
meeting your gaze.



## Burst Bonds


**School** evocation; **Level** inquisitor 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Range** touch

**Target** one object or creature restraining you

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Fortitude half (object); **Spell Resistance**
  yes

You blast your restraints with divine wrath, dealing 1d6 points
of damage per caster level to the target object (maximum 5d6),
ignoring hardness of 10 or less. A Fortitude save halves the
damage, although only magical restraints receive a saving throw.

You can also target a creature that is grappling or otherwise
restraining you (such as by adhesive or the swallow whole
ability) with the spell. You don't need to make a touch attack to
use *[burst bonds]* against a creature, and you can cast this
spell without making a concentration check while grappled or
pinned. The creature does not take damage as above. If you are
grappled and your target fails its save, you may make an
immediate attempt to break the grapple (but not reverse it) as a
free action, with a +1 luck bonus to your CMB per caster level
(maximum +5). If the target creature fails its save and you are
restrained by an ability that originally allowed a saving throw,
*[burst bonds]* allows a new saving throw with a +1 luck bonus
per two caster levels (maximum +5).



## Cacophonous Call


**School**enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
  bard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a scrap of sheet music)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You fill your target's mind with a blaring cacophony of
discordant sounds, making it hard for the target to act and
concentrate. The creature gains the nauseated condition for the
duration of the spell if it fails its Will save.

## Cacophonus Call, Mass

**School**enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
  bard 5

**Target** one creature/level (all of which must be within 30
  feet)

This spell functions as *[cacophonous call]*, except that it
affects multiple creatures.



## Calcific Touch


**School** transmutation [earth]; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** touch

**Target** creature or creatures touched (up to one per level)

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

Your touch progressively transmutes the substance of creatures
you touch into stone. Once per round, you may deliver a touch
attack that inflicts 1d4 points of Dexterity damage and slows the
target (as the spell) for 1 round. A successful Fortitude save
negates the slow effect but not the ability damage. A target
reduced to 0 Dexterity is petrified permanently. *[Break
enchantment]*, *[restoration]*, or *[stone to flesh]* can reverse
the effects of *[calcific touch]*.



## Call Animal


**School**enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting];
**Level**druid 1, ranger 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S, DF

**Range**see description

**Effect** one animal whose CR is equal or less than your caster
  level

**Duration**1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance**none

This spell calls the nearest wild animal of a particular type you
designate (provided the animal's CR is equal to or less than your
caster level) to seek you out. The animal moves toward you under
its own power, so the time it takes to arrive depends on how
close an animal of the desired type is when you cast the
spell. If there is no animal of that type capable of reaching you
within the spell's duration, you are aware of this fact, but the
spell is wasted.  [Knowledge] of the local fauna makes this spell
more effective, and the GM may permit a [Knowledge] (nature)
skill check (DC 15) to know what animals can be found in an area.

When the called animal arrives, it approaches to within 5 feet of
you and remains nearby for the duration of the spell. Its
starting attitude is indifferent, modified by circumstances and
interaction. Other than starting attitude, this spell gives you
no special influence or ability to communicate with the called
animal, although you may use other spells or abilities to do so.

Once the spell's duration expires, the animal acts in accordance
with its attitude. Most animals will likely wander off, but a
hostile predatory animal may attack, especially if it is hungry
or provoked.

Domesticated animals or animals trained by someone else,
including such creatures as familiars or animal companions, are
unaffected by *call animals*.



## Campfire Wall


**School** evocation [fire, light]; **Level** bard 3, druid 2,
ranger 2, sorcerer/wizard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (ash made from burnt thorns)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect** 20-ft.-radius sphere centered on fire source

**Duration** 2 hours/level; see below (D)

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You can create a barrier around a fire of at least campfire size
that shelters everyone inside so long as the fire continues to
burn. The barrier appears as a crackling sphere of light and fire
that is clearly visible, providing as much illumination as a
torch. The barrier bocks line of sight, granting creatures on
either side of the barrier total concealment from creatures on
the other side. Any object or creature passing through the
barrier from outside takes 1d6 points of fire damage and is also
outlined with light equivalent to that of a torch, for 1d6
minutes. Creatures outlined in this way are plainly visible
regardless of the light conditions and do not benefit from any
sort of concealment, magical or otherwise. The light is not
bright enough to have any special effect on undead or creatures
vulnerable to light. Creatures inside the barrier can leave
without penalty, but if they try to return they suffer the same
consequences as anyone else. If the fire source at the barrier's
center is extinguished or moved, the spell ends.



## Castigate


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [fear, language-dependent,
mind-affecting]; **Level** inquisitor 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** 1 round/level or 1 round; see text

**Saving Throw** Will partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

You compel the target to beg for forgiveness. On a failed save,
the target cowers with fear. On a successful save, it is shaken
for 1 round.  Each round on its turn, a cowering subject may
attempt a new save to end the effect. A creature who worships the
same god as you takes a -2 penalty on its saving throw.

## Castigate, Mass

**School** enchantment (compulsion) [fear, language-dependent,
mind-affecting]; **Level** inquisitor 5

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Targets** one creature/level, no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

This spell functions as *[castigate]*, except it affects many
creatures.



## Cast Out


**School** abjuration; **Level** inquisitor 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

With a melee touch attack you blast a single creature and disrupt
any magic controlling it. The target takes 2d8 points of damage +
1 point per caster level (maximum +15). In addition, you make a
dispel check against any *[magic jar]* effect (including a
ghost's malevolence ability) or enchantment (compulsion) spells
on the target creature, starting with the highest level spells
and proceeding to lower level spells. Treat this as a targeted
*[dispel magic]* spell, except *[cast out]* can dispel one such
spell for every four caster levels you possess. A successful Will
save halves the damage and limits the dispelling to a single
spell or effect.



## Challenge Evil


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
paladin 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one evil creature

**Duration** 1 minute/level (D)

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You challenge an evil creature to bring the fight to you, or
suffer the consequences. You gain a +2 sacred bonus on all melee
attacks against the subject of the spell. At the end of its turn,
if the target has not made at least one attack on you, it becomes
sickened. If you move away from the target, the spell ends.



## Chameleon Stride


**School** illusion (glamer); **Level** ranger 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

You fade into the background, and while you are not truly
invisible, you are hard to pinpoint due to your translucent
state. While under the effects of this spell, you gain a +4 bonus
on [Stealth] checks and have concealment from creatures more than
5 feet away (attacks have a 20% miss chance).



## Clashing Rocks


**School** conjuration (creation) [earth]; **Level** druid 9,
sorcerer/wizard 9

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Effect** see text

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Reflex partial, see text; **Spell Resistance**
  no

You create two Colossal-sized masses of rock, dirt, and stone and
slam them together against a single creature between them. The
*[clashing rocks]* appear up to 30 feet away from the target on
opposite sides and rush toward it with a mighty grinding
crash. You must make a ranged touch attack to hit the target with
the rocks. The *[clashing rocks]* ignore concealment and cover,
and if there is a solid barrier between the target and either of
the *[clashing rocks]*, the spell has a +28 bonus on the Strength
check to burst through the barrier and continue unimpeded to the
target.  A creature struck by the *[clashing rocks]* takes 20d6
points of bludgeoning damage and is knocked prone. If the target
fails a Reflex saving throw, it is also buried under the
resulting rubble as if by a cave-in (see *PF RPG Core
Rulebook* 415).

If the *[clashing rocks]* miss the target, the target still takes
10d6 points of bludgeoning damage from falling rocks and is
knocked prone. A successful Reflex save reduces this damage to
half and the target remains standing. Creatures other than the
target that occupy the spaces where the *[clashing rocks]* appear
or within their path (30 feet wide, 30 feet high, and up to 60
feet long) must also make Reflex saves or take 10d6 points of
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone (save for half and remain
standing). A creature can only take damage once from the
*[clashing rocks]*, no matter how many times the *[clashing
rocks]* pass over a target creature.



## Cleanse


**School** evocation; **Level** cleric 5, inquisitor 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** instantaneous

Positive energy infuses and cleanses your body. This spell cures
4d8 points of damage + 1 point per caster level (maximum +25) and
ends any and all of the following adverse conditions affecting
you: ability damage, blinded, confused, dazzled, deafened,
diseased, exhausted, fatigued, nauseated, poisoned, and
sickened. In addition, *[cleanse]* functions as *[break
enchantment]* upon a single additional effect of your choice that
is affecting you and that can be legally affected by this effect.

If used by undead or other creatures healed by negative energy,
the spell cleanses with negative energy rather than positive.



## Cloak of Dreams


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
bard 5, sorcerer/wizard 6, witch 6

**Casting Time** 1 round

**Components** V, S, M (a rose petal and a drop of perfume)

**Range** 5 ft.

**Area** 5-ft.-radius emanation centered on you

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You are surrounded by a soporific aroma that causes living
creatures that begin their turn or end their movement within 5
feet of you to fall asleep for 1 minute. Creatures must save each
time they begin their turn or end their movement within the
*[cloak of dreams]*, even if they have previously saved against
the effect. Sleeping creatures are helpless but can be awakened
with a standard action or after being wounded. Creatures with the
scent special quality have a -4 penalty on their saves.



## Cloak of Shade


**School**abjuration; **Level**druid 1, ranger 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S, M (a leaf from a shade tree)

**Range**touch

**Target**one creature per level

**Duration**1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**yes
(harmless)

This spell provides the subject with some degree of protection
from the harmful effects of the sun. The cloaked subject treats
environmental heat due to sun exposure as one level less: severe
heat is considered very hot conditions, while very hot is
considered average temperature (see [heat dangers]). The *[cloak
of shade]* also reduces any penalties from sunlight by 1. The
spell does not, however, eliminate the effects of direct sunlight
on creatures vulnerable to sunlight. *[Cloak of shade]* has no
effect on environmental heat from sources other than the sun.



## Cloak of Winds


**School** abjuration [air]; **Level** druid 3, ranger 3,
sorcerer/wizard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You shroud a creature in a whirling screen of strong, howling
wind. The subject is never checked or blown away by strong winds
of windstorm or lesser strength (whether natural or magically
created), and ranged attack rolls against the subject take a -4
penalty. Tiny or smaller creatures must succeed at a Fortitude
save to successfully touch or attack the subject in
melee. Failure knocks the attacker prone and pushes it 5 feet
away from the subject per level of the caster. This movement can
pass through the squares of other creatures without affecting
them and does not provoke attacks of opportunity, but the
creature takes 3d6 points of nonlethal damage, plus 1d6 if the
creature strikes a solid object that blocks its movement.



## Confess


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [language-dependent,
mind-affecting]; **Level** inquisitor 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round

**Saving Throw** Will partial; see text; **Spell Resistance** yes

You ask the target creature a single question. On the subject's
next action, it must answer truthfully in the same language as
the question or take 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels
(maximum 5d6) and be sickened for 2d4 rounds. A successful Will
save negates the sickening effect and halves the damage. A
creature that is unable to answer still takes damage.



## Contagious Flame


**School** evocation [fire]; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** three or more rays

**Duration** 3 rounds

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You blast several enemies with beams of fire. You may fire three
rays, plus one additional ray for every four levels beyond 11th
(to a maximum of five rays at 19th level). Each ray requires a
ranged touch attack to hit and deals 4d6 points of fire
damage. The rays may be fired at the same or different targets,
but all rays must be aimed at targets within 30 feet of each
other and fired simultaneously.

Every round on your turn, a new ray of fire launches from each
creature who took damage from the spell in the previous
round—these new rays attack as if you fired them, but their point
of origin is the previous creature damaged. You can choose the
new targets as a free action, all of whom must be within close
range (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) of their new starting point. This
contagion of flame continues for a total of three rounds—a
creature can be struck more than once by this spell over the
course of these three rounds, although never by a ray of fire
that launches from itself.



## Coordinated Effort


**School** divination; **Level** bard 3, inquisitor 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets** you plus one willing creature per 3 levels, no two of
which can be more than 30 ft. part

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

Choose a single teamwork feat that you possess. You forge a link
with your allies, allowing them to gain the benefits of the
chosen feat even if they do not have it themselves. You must be a
part of the group qualifying for a given bonus for your allies to
gain the benefits. For example, two of your allies flanking an
orc would gain no benefit from your Outflank feat, but an ally
flanking the orc with you would. Your allies' positioning and
actions must still meet the prerequisites listed in the teamwork
feat for either of you to receive the listed bonus.



## Corruption Resistance


**School** abjuration [chaotic, evil, good, or lawful]; **Level**
antipaladin 2, inquisitor 2, paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 10 minutes/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You grant the touched creature limited protection from magical
effects that inflict damage based on the target creature's
alignment, such as *[holy smite]*, *[order's wrath]*, a paladin's
smite evil attack, or an *[unholy]* weapon. Choose one alignment
type: chaos, evil, good, or law. The subject takes 5 less points
of damage from effects that specifically harm creatures of that
alignment. The value of the protection increases to 10 points at
7th level and 15 points at 11th level. The spell protects the
recipient's equipment as well.

*[Corruption resistance]* protects against spells, spell-like
abilities, and special abilities, not physical
attacks. *[Corruption resistance]* only protects against
damage. The subject can still suffer side effects from such
attacks. When you use this spell to protect an alignment, it
gains the descriptor of that alignment.



## Coward's Lament


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
inquisitor 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Will partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

You compel an opponent to face you in combat, or suffer for its
cowardice. Each round that the target fails to attack you in
melee, it receives a cumulative -1 penalty to its Armor Class,
attack rolls, and saving throws (maximum penalty -5). Each round
at the end of its turn, the target may attempt a Will saving
throw to prevent the penalties from increasing for that
round. All penalties reset to zero when the target attacks you in
melee, but increase again if it stops attacking. If the target is
prevented from attacking you by physical restraint, magic, or
impassable terrain, the penalties do not increase. If you move
away from the target, the spell ends.



## Crafter's Curse


**School**transmutation; **Level**sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S, M (a broken tool)

**Range**close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target**one creature

**Duration**1 day/level (D)

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance**yes

The target of *[crafter's curse]* takes a -5 penalty on all
[Craft] skill checks while the spell lasts.



## Crafter's Fortune


**School**transmutation; **Level**alchemist 1, sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S, F (a tool)

**Range**close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target**one creature

**Duration**1 day/level or until discharged (D)

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**yes
(harmless)

The target is struck by inspiration and gains a +5 luck bonus on
its next [Craft] skill check.



## Create Pit


**School** conjuration (creation); **Level** sorcerer/wizard 2,
summoner 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, F (miniature shovel costing 10 gp)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect** 10-ft.-by-10-ft. hole, 10 ft. deep/2 levels

**Duration** 1 round + 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Reflex negates; **Spell Resistance** no

You create a 10-foot-by-10-foot extradimensional hole with a
depth of 10 feet per two caster levels (maximum 30 feet). You
must create the pit on a horizontal surface of sufficient
size. Since it extends into another dimension, the pit has no
weight and does not otherwise displace the original underlying
material. You can create the pit in the deck of a ship as easily
as in a dungeon floor or the ground of a forest. Any creature
standing in the area where you first conjured the pit must make a
Reflex saving throw to jump to safety in the nearest open
space. In addition, the edges of the pit are sloped, and any
creature ending its turn on a square adjacent to the pit must
make a Reflex saving throw with a +2 bonus to avoid falling into
it. Creatures subjected to an effect intended to push them into
the pit (such as bull rush) do not get a saving throw to avoid
falling in if they are affected by the pushing effect.

Creatures who fall into the pit take falling damage as
normal. The pit's coarse stone walls have a [Climb] DC of
25. When the duration of the spell ends, creatures within the
hole rise up with the bottom of the pit until they are standing
on the surface over the course of a single round.



## Create Treasure Map


**School** divination; **Level** bard 2, druid 3, ranger 2,
sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 hour

**Components** V, S, M (powdered metal and rare inks worth 100
  gp)

**Range** touch

**Target** one dead creature

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You can take a piece from a dead creature's body and use it to
create a map that reveals the locations of any valuables that
creature knew about while still alive. You must cut this piece
off yourself and the creature cannot have died more than 24 hours
prior to the casting of this spell.  You cannot cast this spell
on a creature without a physical body, and the portion you remove
must have a fairly level surface such as a piece of hide,
carapace, or skin. The map you create is accurate to the best
knowledge the creature had at the time of its death. It reveals
the location of one source of treasure for every three caster
levels you possess. Any inaccuracies or faulty information held
by the creature are represented on the map as well. Similarly,
the map cannot account for any changes that occur after the
creature's death. You must choose the scale of the map when
creating it, opting between nearby (e.g., one or two dungeon
levels), local (e.g., a valley or community), or broad (e.g., a
country or larger). The map reveals the locations of what the
creature deemed most valuable within its area. Depending on the
creature, the map might reveal a source of tasty food, suitable
mates, or even your own treasure vault.



## Cup of Dust


**School**transmutation; **Level**druid 3, witch 3

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S, M (a pinch of dust)

**Range**close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target**one creature

**Duration**1 day/level (D)

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance**yes

You curse the target with a thirst no drink can quench. On a
failed saving throw, the target begins to [dehydrate]. The
effects of this spell cannot inflict more nonlethal damage than
the target has hit points. No amount of drinking can counter this
effect, although the target still experiences the other normal
effects of any liquid imbibed (such as poisons or potions). *[Cup
of dust]*can be removed with a *[break enchantment], [limited
wish], [miracle], [remove curse],*or *[wish]* spell, but effects
suffered as a result of dehydration must be healed by normal
means.



## Dancing Lantern


**School** transmutation [fire, light]; **Level** bard 1, cleric
1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1, witch 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, F (a lantern)

**Range** touch

**Effect** animates one lantern

**Duration** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You can animate a lantern and order it to follow you. The lantern
floats at shoulder height and remains within 5 feet of you, no
matter how fast you move. The lantern cannot support any
additional weight. The lantern illuminates its normal area, even
if it does not have any oil in it. For the purposes of spells or
effects targeting it the lantern always acts as if in your
possession even when not directly on your person.  A*[dancing
lantern]* can be made permanent with a *[permanency]* spell (CL
9th, 2,500 gp).



## Deadly Finale


**School** evocation [sonic]; **Level** bard 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets** 1 creature/3 levels no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

You must have a bardic performance in effect to cast this
spell. With a flourish, you immediately end your performance,
dealing 2d8 points of sonic damage to each target. In addition,
each target takes 3d6 points of bleed damage for 1d6 rounds. A
save negates the bleed damage but not the sonic damage.



## Deafening Song Bolt


**School** evocation [sonic]; **Level** bard 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** up to 3 creatures, no two of which can be more than 30
ft.  apart

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance** no

Three notes you sing or perform become tangible bolts of arcane
energy that shriek across the battlefield. Each bolt requires a
ranged touch attack to hit and deals 3d10 points of sonic damage,
deafening the target for 1d6 rounds. The bolts may be fired at
the same or different targets, but all must be fired
simultaneously.



## Defile Armor


**School** abjuration [evil]; **Level** inquisitor 4, antipaladin
  3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** touch

**Target** armor touched

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless, object); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless, object)

As *[sanctify armor]*, except you gain DR 5/good when using your
judgment or smite ability.



## Deflection


**School** abjuration [force]; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 7

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a piece of rubber dipped in glue)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level

You surround yourself in a whirling barrier of force that sends
any attack that misses you hurling back toward its source. This
applies to any melee or ranged attack directed against you so
long as it uses an attack roll to determine whether or not it
strikes you. If an attack misses you, the attacker must make a
second attack roll against its own Armor Class, using all of the
applicable modifiers of the original attack and if it hits, the
attacker takes the attack's damage and suffers all the other
consequences of getting struck with that attack.  You cannot
deflect attacks that miss you for any reason besides a failed
attack roll (such as concealment). Similarly, you cannot deflect
attacks that actually do strike you but simply fail to do any
harm.



## Delayed Consumption


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 day/level (D) or until discharged

When you consume this extract, you quickly consume another
extract of your choice—this second extract's effects do not come
into effect until a later point. You must consume this second,
companion extract on the round following *[delayed consumption]*
or waste the extract. The companion extract can be no higher than
4th level, and you must pay any costs associated with the
companion extract when you consume it.

At any point during the duration of this extract, you can cause
the companion extract to take effect as an immediate action. You
can only have one *[delayed consumption]* in effect at one
time. If a second is consumed, the first is dispelled without any
effect.



## Denounce


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [language-dependent,
mind-affecting]; **Level** bard 4, inquisitor 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Area** 30-ft.-radius burst

**Duration** 1 hour/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You speak out against a single creature within line of sight and
turn possible allies against it by drawing upon the power of your
voice and conviction. Creatures in the area who can see the
denounced creature must make a Will saving throw or have their
[starting attitude] toward the denounced creature worsened by two
levels. For example, creatures previously indifferent to the
subject turn unfriendly.  [Diplomacy] checks made to reverse the
effects of *[denounce]* are made at a -10 penalty.



## Detect Aberration


**School**divination; **Level**druid 1, ranger 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S

**Range**long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Area**cone-shaped emanation

**Duration**concentration, up to 10 minutes/level (D)

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance**no

This spell functions like *[detect animals or plants],* except it
detects creatures of the aberration type.



## Detonate


**School** evocation [acid, cold, electricity, or fire];
**Level** alchemist 4, sorcerer/wizard 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (two vials; one containing acid and one
containing an alkaline solution worth a total of 50 gp)

**Range** 30 ft.

**Area** 30-ft.-radius spread centered on you

**Duration** 1 round, then instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Reflex half; **Spell Resistance** yes

You flood yourself with a potent surge of elemental energy. One
round after completing the casting of the spell, the energy
explodes from your body.

When this spell creates the explosion of energy, choose one of
the following four energy types: acid, cold, electricity, or
fire. The explosion inflicts 1d8 points of damage of that energy
type per caster level (maximum 10d8) to all creatures and
unattended objects within 15 feet, and half that amount to
targets past 15 feet but within 30 feet.  You automatically take
half damage from the explosion, without a saving throw, but any
other energy resistance or energy immunity effects you may have
in place can prevent or lessen this overflow damage caused by the
explosion.



## Devolution


**School** transmutation; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 3, summoner 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a chameleon scale)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one eidolon

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

This spell causes an eidolon to lose one evolution plus one
additional evolution for every five caster levels. Evolutions
with the highest total cost are lost first. If there is a tie,
randomly determine which is lost. If this spell causes an eidolon
to fail to meet the prerequisites for other evolutions or
abilities, those evolutions or abilities are lost as long as this
spell persists.



## Discordant Blast


**School** evocation [sonic]; **Level** bard 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 10 ft. or 30 ft.

**Area** see text

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You create a wave of thunder and force, either in a
10-foot-radius burst centered on you or in 30-foot cone-shaped
burst. Creatures in the area take 3d6 points of sonic damage and
are pushed away as if bull rushed.  Make a combat maneuver check
and apply its results to each creature in the area. Your CMB for
this bull rush is equal to your caster level plus your Charisma
modifier. This bull rush does not provoke an attack of
opportunity. A *[discordant blast]* cannot penetrate a
*[silence]* spell (or any similar magical silence effect).



## Divine Transfer


**School**necromancy; **Level** paladin 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** touch

**Target** living creature touched

**Duration** instantaneous + 1 round/level (see text)

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

With a single touch, you transfer some of your life essence to
the subject, transferring your hit points and your resolve. When
you touch the subject you can transfer up to a number of hit
points equal to your Constitution score to the target. These hit
points heal the subject, but cannot raise the subject's hit
points higher than its normal hit point total. In addition, the
subject gains DR/evil equal to your Charisma bonus (if any) for
the duration of the spell.



## Divine Vessel


**School** transmutation [chaotic, evil, good, or lawful];
**Level** oracle 8

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

You accept otherworldly energies into your body and
transform. Your size increases by one category, your height
doubles, and your weight increases by a factor of eight. Your
features shift into those of a cold and alien being of logic, a
creature of primal chaos, an angelic presence, or a fiendish
monster, as chosen by you. You gain a +6 size bonus to Strength
and Constitution, a +3 natural armor bonus, darkvision 60 ft.,
and SR of 12 + your caster level. These modifiers replace the
normal modifiers for increasing your size. The size modifier for
AC, attacks, CMB, and CMD changes as appropriate for your new
size category.  This spell doesn't change your base
speed. Determine space and reach as appropriate for your new
size.

If insufficient room is available for the desired growth, you
attain the maximum possible size and may make a Strength check
(using your increased Strength) to burst any enclosures in the
process. If you fail, you are constrained without harm by the
materials enclosing you—the spell cannot crush you by increasing
your size.

All equipment you wear or carry is similarly enlarged by this
spell.  Melee weapons deal more damage. Other magical properties
are not affected by this spell. Any enlarged item that leaves
your possession (including a projectile or thrown weapon)
instantly returns to its normal size. This means that thrown and
projectile weapons deal their normal damage. Magical effects that
increase size do not stack.

You gain additional abilities as noted below.

**Anarchic aspect**: You gain the following abilities: an
additional +2 bonus to Constitution, DR 10/lawful, resist acid
10, electricity 10, and sonic 10, a +4 bonus on saves against
poison, blindsense 30 feet, and a fly speed of 60 feet (good
maneuverability). You gain a bite attack dealing 2d6 points of
damage. Your natural weapons and any weapons you wield are
considered chaotic-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
resistance.

**Axiomatic aspect**: You gain the following abilities: an
additional +2 bonus to Strength, DR 10/chaotic, resist cold 10,
electricity 10, and fire 10, a +4 bonus on saves against poison,
low-light vision, and a fly speed of 60 feet (good
maneuverability). You gain 2 slam attacks dealing 1d6 points of
damage each. Your natural weapons and any weapons you wield are
considered lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
resistance.

**Celestial aspect**: You gain the following abilities: a +2
bonus to Dexterity, DR 10/evil, resist acid 10, cold 10, and
electricity 10, a +4 bonus on saves against poison, low-light
vision, and a fly speed of 60 feet (good maneuverability). You
gain 2 slam attacks dealing 1d6 points of damage each. Your
natural weapons and any weapons you wield are considered
good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage resistance.

**Fiendish aspect**: You gain the following abilities: an
additional +2 bonus to Strength, DR 10/good, resist acid 10, cold
10, and fire 10, a +4 bonus on saves against poison, see in
darkness, and a fly speed of 60 feet (good maneuverability). You
gain 2 claw attacks dealing 1d6 points of damage each. Your
natural weapons and any weapons you wield are considered
evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage resistance.

When used to assume an anarchic, axiomatic, celestial, or
fiendish aspect, this spell is a chaotic, lawful, good, or evil
spell respectively.



## Draconic Reservoir


**School** evocation [acid, cold, electricity, or fire];
**Level** alchemist 3, sorcerer/wizard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a scale from dragon that produces the
energy you seek to absorb)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 10 minutes/level or until discharged; see text

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

*[Draconic reservoir]* functions as *[protection from energy]*,
absorbing 6 points of one type of energy damage per caster level
(acid, cold, electricity, or fire, maximum 60 points). Each
round, as a swift action, the subject can release 1d6 points of
the absorbed energy and apply it to any melee attack, as if using
an *acidic*, *[flaming]*, *[frost]*, or *[shock]* weapon. The
first creature the subject strikes with this attack takes the
energy damage in addition to any other consequences of the
attack. Releasing energy in this way does not “free up” space to
absorb still more energy; the maximum amount of energy the spell
can absorb remains fixed. The subject cannot release more energy
than he currently has absorbed. Once the subject has absorbed all
the energy allowed by the spell, he takes damage as normal from
that energy type. Once the energy has been released, the spell is
discharged.

*[Draconic reservoir]* does not stack with [protection from
*energy]*.  [Draconic reservoir]* overlaps (and does not stack
*with) *[resist energy]*. If a character is warded by *[draconic
*reservoir]* and *[resist energy]*, *[draconic reservoir]*
*absorbs damage until it reaches its maximum limit.



## Dragon's Breath


**School**evocation [acid, cold, electricity, or fire];
**Level**alchemist 4, sorcerer/wizard 4

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S, M (a dragon scale)

**Range**30 ft. or 60 ft.

**Area** cone-shaped burst or line

**Duration**instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Reflex half; **Spell Resistance**yes

You breathe out a blast of energy. Creatures in the affected area
take 1d6 points of energy damage per caster level (maximum of
12d6). A successful Reflex save results in half damage. The
spell's effect and energy type depend on the type of dragon scale
used:

*Black dragon:* 60-foot line of acid.

*Blue or bronze dragon:* 60-foot line of electricity.

*Green dragon:* 30-foot cone of acid.

*Gold or red dragon:* 30-foot cone of fire.

*Silver or white dragon:* 30-foot cone of cold.

*Brass dragon:* 60-foot line of fire.

*Copper dragon:* 60-foot line of acid.



## Dust of Twilight


**School** conjuration [darkness]; **Level** bard 2,
  sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (coal dust)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** creatures and objects in a 10-ft. spread

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (fatigue only); **Spell
Resistance** no

A shower of iridescent black particles clings to and extinguishes
torches, lanterns, sunrods, and similar mundane light sources and
dispels any spell of 2nd level or lower with the light descriptor
(as *[dispel magic]*).  Creatures in the area must make a
Fortitude save or become fatigued.



## Eagle Eye


**School**divination; **Level**druid 2, ranger 2

**Casting Time**1 minute

**Component**V, S, DF

**Range**long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Effect** magical sensor

**Duration**1 minute/level (D)

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance**no

*[Eagle eye]*creates a magical sensor directly above you.  The
sensor can appear anywhere above you, to a maximum height equal
to the spell's range. You can see from this vantage as if you
were actually there, rotating your viewpoint 360 degrees. You
perceive with your normal visual senses. A caster using *[eagle
eye]* can easily see for a considerable distance. The spell does
not penetrate any solid surface, although it is unaffected by
foliage and the like.



## Elemental Aura


**School** evocation [acid, cold, electricity, or fire];
**Level** alchemist 3, sorcerer/wizard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Reflex half; see text; **Spell Resistance** yes

This spell forms an aura of energy around you, damaging all those
that come near you. Choose an energy type: acid, cold,
electricity, or fire.  Creatures adjacent to you when this spell
is cast and at the start of your turn take 2d6 points of energy
damage of the selected type. This aura has an additional effect,
depending upon the type of energy chosen.

**Acid**: Creatures affected by your aura take 1 point of ongoing
acid damage per round for 1 round per three caster levels, and
are sickened for the duration of the ongoing acid damage.

**Cold**: Creatures affected by your aura are fatigued. A
creature that is already fatigued suffers no additional effect.

**Electricity**: Creatures affected by your aura are staggered
for 1 round.

**Fire**: Creatures affected by your aura catch on fire (*Core
Rulebook* 444).

Creatures adjacent to you are allowed a Reflex save to halve the
damage and negate the additional effect. The aura's additional
effects do not stack if a creature takes damage from your aura
multiple times. You may only have one *[elemental aura]* in
effect at one time.  When you cast this spell to deal acid, cold,
electricity, or fire damage, it is a spell of that type.



## Elemental Speech


**School** divination [air, earth, fire, or water]; **Level**
bard 3, cleric 3, druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (iron filings)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

This spell enables you to converse with creatures associated with
a chosen element, including but not limited to true elemental
creatures.  This spell gains the elemental subtype based on the
version of the spell you cast. *[Elemental speech]* does not
guarantee a friendly reaction; it merely enables
communication. You may converse with all creatures of the
selected type with an Intelligence score of 1 or greater, even if
they do not understand one another.

When cast as an air spell, you can converse in Auran and with any
creature that has the air subtype or a fly speed.

When cast as an earth spell, you can converse in Terran and with
any creature that has the earth subtype or a burrow speed.

When cast as a fire spell, you can converse in Ignan and with any
creature that has the fire subtype.

When cast as a water spell, you can converse in Aquan and with
any creature that has the water subtype or a swim speed.



## Elemental Touch


**School** evocation [acid, cold, electricity, or fire];
**Level** alchemist 2, sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a bit of the chosen element: earth,
water, air, or fire)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** see text; **Spell Resistance** no

Upon completing the casting of this spell, elemental energy
infuses your hands. Choose an energy type: acid, cold,
electricity, or fire. You gain a melee touch attack causing 1d6
points of damage of that energy type, along with a special effect
described below. You also deal energy damage and the related
special effect when you attack with your hands using an unarmed
strike, a single claw, or a single slam attack. This bonus damage
can never apply to multiple weapons.

**Acid**: Your touch attack causes 1 point of ongoing acid damage
per round for 1 round per three caster levels. The target must
make a Fortitude save or be sickened for the duration of the
ongoing acid damage.

**Cold**: The target must make a Fortitude save or be fatigued. A
creature that is already fatigued suffers no additional effect.

**Electricity**: The target must make a Fortitude save or be
staggered for 1 round.

**Fire**: Your hands ignite and shed light as a torch. Your touch
may cause targets to catch on fire (*Core Rulebook* 444).

Subsequent attacks inflict the normal damage, but the additional
effects do not stack. This spell grants no special protection to
anything held in or worn on your hands. When you cast this spell
to deal acid, cold, electricity, or fire damage, it is a spell of
that type.



## Elude Time


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (powdered diamond, emerald, ruby, and
sapphire dust worth 500 gp)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** up to 1 minute/level; see text

You place yourself in a state of suspended animation, similar to
*[temporal stasis]*.  At the time of casting, you choose when the
stasis will expire, up to the maximum duration of the
spell. Until the duration ends, time ceases to flow for you, and
all bodily functions cease. No force or effect can harm you until
the spell expires or is removed, such as by a successful *[dispel
magic]* spell.



## Enemy Hammer


**School** transmutation; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (puppet strings)

**Range** long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

You grab a creature with telekinesis and use it to batter nearby
opponents or objects. You must target a specific creature when
casting this spell and once you select that creature you cannot
switch to another. Each round, as a standard action, you can
attempt to hurl the target at any creature or object within 30
feet of it. You must make an attack roll whenever you use the
target as a weapon. The attack bonus for this attack is equal to
your caster level plus either your Intelligence or Charisma
modifier (whichever is higher). If you successfully hit the new
target with the creature both it and the creature take damage
based on the creature's size.

**Creature Size Damage Dealt**

  Creature Size   Damage Dealt
  --------------- --------------
  Fine            1d4
  Diminutive      1d6
  Tiny            1d8
  Small           1d10
  Medium          2d6
  Large           2d8
  Huge            2d10
  Gargantuan      3d6
  Colossal        3d8

The target creature can make a Fortitude saving throw each time
you attempt to use it as a weapon. If it makes its saving throw
it can act normally, but if it fails its save it loses all
actions for the round and ends its turn prone in a square
adjacent to the target of your attack. However, if the creature
chooses to resist your efforts to move it, taking no other
actions for the round, it gets a +4 circumstance bonus on its
saving throw. The spell ends immediately if the target creature
dies or is destroyed.



## Enter Image


**School** transmutation; **Level** bard 2, cleric 3,
  sorcerer/wizard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a drop of paint and a ball of clay)

**Range** 50 ft./level

**Effect** transfer consciousness to any object bearing your
  likeness

**Duration** concentration

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You gain a dim impression of the activities around any object
bearing your face or form and can also project your consciousness
into one such object at a time, allowing you to observe or even
interact with nearby creatures. This spell allows you to leave
your body and subconsciously monitor the immediate area around
any depiction of your image whether one, hundreds, or even
thousands. Each such image has the full range of your normal
senses (sight, hearing, smell, etc.) and you can make a
[Perception] check to notice anything occurring nearby. The DC of
this check is always 10 greater than what it would be if you were
actually present at that location, so even if you would normally
notice something automatically (such as talking, normally a DC of
0), you would need to make a DC 10 [Perception] check to notice
it.

You may, at any time, choose to fill one specific image within
range with your consciousness. While inside an image you lose the
ability to monitor any other images within range but remain fully
aware of your own body's surroundings. Your body is defenseless
and helpless (always failing any saving throw) while your
consciousness is filling an image, but you can return to it at
any time as an immediate action.

When you fill an image with your consciousness it gains a limited
form of animation. Statues and similar three-dimensional
representations can move their heads, make gestures, and talk,
but cannot attack or leave their square without
assistance. Portraits or similar two-dimensional representations
bearing your likeness can also talk and your image can move
anywhere within the picture or even temporarily alter it (such as
by picking a flower in the painting). You cannot use any spells
or other abilities while within an image.

You may leave the image at any time, returning you to your
body. Once your consciousness departs from an object bearing your
likeness, it immediately reverts to the appearance it had before
you entered it. If someone destroys or damages the image you
return to your body unharmed.  The spell lasts until you cease
concentrating, or until it is terminated by some outside means,
such as a *[dispel magic]* cast upon either the image or your
body, or if your body is killed.



## Euphoric Tranquility


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
bard 6, cleric 8, druid 8, sorcerer/wizard 8

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a poppy flower)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** none and Will partial (see below); **Spell
Resistance** yes

A creature under the effect of this enchantment enters a state of
euphoria. The target treats all creatures as dear friends and
abhors violence, but may rise up to protect itself if violence is
perpetrated against it. Until the end of the spell's duration,
the creature's speed is halved, and it cannot make attacks or
cast spells. If the creature is attacked, it gets a Will saving
throw. If the saving throw succeeds, the creature can make act
normally for 1 round. If the saving throw fails, the creature
moves half its speed away from the attacker as its next action.

Furthermore, if the creature is interacted with, or questioned
while under the effects of this spell, it is considered to have
an attitude of Helpful (see the [Diplomacy] skill, *Core
Rulebook* 94), though any advice or answers it gives may be
disjointed or stream of consciousness due to its euphoric state.



## Evolution Surge


**School** transmutation; **Level** summoner 3

This spell functions as *[lesser evolution surge]*, except that
you can grant any


## evolution whose total cost does not exceed 4 evolution points.


**School** transmutation; **Level** summoner 4

This spell functions as *[lesser evolution surge]*, except that
you can grant any two


## evolutions whose total cost does not exceed 6 evolution
   points.


**School** transmutation; **Level** summoner 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a chameleon scale)

**Range** touch

**Target** your eidolon

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** no

This spell causes your eidolon to take on new
characteristics. You can grant the eidolon any evolution whose
total cost does not exceed 2 evolution points. You may only grant
one evolution with this spell, even if that evolution can be
taken multiple times. You can grant an evolution that allows you
to spend additional evolution points to upgrade that
evolution. This spell cannot be used to grant an upgrade to an
evolution that the eidolon already possesses. The eidolon must
meet any prerequisites of the selected evolution. This spell does
not allow an eidolon to exceed its maximum number of natural
attacks.



## Expeditious Excavation


**School** transmutation [earth]; **Level** druid 1,
  sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (tiny shovel)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Area** dirt in a 5-ft. cube

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** see text; **Spell Resistance** no

You can excavate and move earth, dust, and sand up to the size of
a 5-foot cube. If you are buried, you may open a 5-foot cube
around yourself, but the spell cannot be used for
tunneling. Besides its mundane applications, you can open a
5-foot-deep pit at a creature's feet. A Medium or smaller
creature falls prone in the pit unless it succeeds on a Reflex
save. With a successful save, it can choose to land harmlessly on
its feet in the pit or hop to an adjacent square; this movement
does not provoke attacks of opportunity. A creature can escape a
5-foot-deep pit with a DC 5 [Climb] check. Larger creatures may
ignore pits smaller than their size.

The earth excavated by this spell is ordinarily distributed
harmlessly across the spell's range, but you may choose to throw
up a burst of grit and debris when you dig a pit. This cloud of
debris provides concealment to any creatures in the square
affected and all adjacent squares for 1 round. *[Expeditious
excavation]* has no effect on solid rock or earth creatures.



## Expend


**School** abjuration; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 7

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (miniature broken hourglass)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Area** 20-ft.-radius burst

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You cause all creatures in the affected area to use up one or
more of their limited-use magical abilities without any actual
effect. A limited-use magical ability is any supernatural or
spell-like ability which a creature can only activate a certain
number of times during a set interval (3/day, 1/hour, etc.). The
spell does not affect abilities which the creature can use at
will or which are constant. It also does not apply to magical
items or anything else external to a creature. A creature in the
spell's area must make a Will saving throw or expend a single use
of one of its abilities. Abilities with the greatest number of
uses per day are affected first; if more than one ability has the
same number of uses, randomly determine which one is affected
first.  Creatures must continue making Will saves, expending an
additional use of an ability for each failed save, until they
succeed, at which point the spell has no further effect.



## Feast of Ashes


**School**transmutation; **Level**druid 2, witch 2

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S, M (a pinch of ash)

**Range**close (25 ft. + 5 ft/2 levels)

**Target**one creature

**Duration**2 days/level (D)

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance**yes

You curse the target with a hunger no food can assuage. On a
failed saving throw, the target begins to [starve]. The effects
of this spell cannot inflict more nonlethal damage than the
target has hit points. No amount of eating can counter the effect
and, further, even attempting to eat causes the target to become
nauseated for 1 round unless they make a DC 12 Fortitude
save. The target still experiences the other normal effects of
anything consumed (such as poisons or potions). *[Feast of
ashes]* can be removed with a *[break enchantment], [limited
wish], [miracle], [remove curse],*or *[wish]* spell, but effects
suffered as a result of starvation must be healed by normal
means.



## Feather Step


**School** transmutation; **Level** bard 1, druid 1, ranger 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 10 minutes/level

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
  Resistance** yes

For the duration of this spell, the subject ignores the adverse
movement effects of difficult terrain, and can even take 5-foot
steps in


## difficult terrain.


**School** transmutation; **Level** bard 3, druid 3, ranger 3

**Target** one creature/level, no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

As *[feather step]*, except this spell affects multiple
creatures.



## Fester


**School** necromancy; **Level** inquisitor 3, witch 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (rotted meat)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** 1 round/level or 1 round; see text

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

Necrotic energy permeates the target, blocking healing
abilities. The subject gains spell resistance equal to 12 + your
caster level against effects that restore hit points or grant
temporary hit points. In addition, any healing provided by
effects that ignore spell resistance (such as fast healing,
regeneration, and some spells) are halved. If the target succeeds
on a Fortitude saving throw, *[fester]* lasts


## only a single round.


**School** necromancy; **Level** inquisitor 6, witch 6

**Target** one creature/level, no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

This spell functions as *[fester]*, except that it affects
multiple foes.



## Fiery Body


**School** transmutation [fire]; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 9

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

This spell transforms your body into living flame. You and your
equipment are immune to fire damage. In fact, every time you
would normally take damage from fire, you are instead healed of
damage at a rate of 1 point per 3 points of damage the fire
attack would have normally inflicted. You are immune to
blindness, critical hits, ability score damage, deafness,
disease, drowning, electricity, poison, stunning, and all spells
that affect your physiology or respiration. You take only half
damage from acid or electricity. You take 150% as much damage
from cold than normal.

You gain a +6 enhancement bonus to your Dexterity score and a fly
speed of 40 ft. (perfect maneuverability). Your unarmed attack
deals an additional 3d6 points of fire damage, and you are
considered armed when making unarmed attacks. Your body burns so
brightly that creatures who do not avert their gaze from you are
dazzled. Fire spells you cast have their save DCs increased by
+1. If you enter water, you are surrounded by a 5-foot radius of
steam and bubbles that grant you concealment (50% miss chance)
but you take 2d6 points of damage each round you remain in water.



## Firebrand


**School** transmutation [fire]; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 7

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature/4 levels, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless), but see below; **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You mark several allies with a flaming rune. This rune does not
cause damage, and sheds light as if it were a torch. While the
*[firebrand]* burns, any creature it marks is immune to damage
from any fire spell you cast. All of the target's weapons (both
natural and manufactured) inflict +1d6 points of fire damage on a
hit (this bonus fire damage stacks with any amount of fire damage
a creature's weapons might already inflict). At any point during
the spell's duration, a creature bearing a *[firebrand]* can
launch a beam of fire at any target within 30 feet as a swift
action.  This ray requires a ranged touch attack to hit and deals
6d6 points of fire damage. Once a creature uses its *[firebrand]*
to fire a ray in this manner, the effects of the spell end for
that creature.



## Fire Breath


**School** evocation [fire]; **Level** alchemist 2,
  sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a chili pepper)

**Range** 15 ft.

**Area** cone-shaped burst

**Duration** 1 round/level or until discharged; see text

**Saving Throw** Reflex half; see text; **Spell Resistance** yes

Up to thrice during this spell's duration, you can belch forth a
cone of fire as a standard action. The first cone deals 4d6
points of fire damage to every creature in the area. The second
cone of flame deals 2d6 points of fire damage to every creature
in the area. The third cone of flame deals 1d6 points of fire
damage to every creature in the area. A successful Reflex save
halves this damage. After the third cone of flame, the spell
ends.



## Firefall


**School** transmutation [fire]; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (one fire source)

**Range** long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Target** one fire source, up to a 20-foot cube

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will negates and Reflex negates; see text;
**Spell Resistance** no

*[Firefall]*causes a fire to erupt into a geyser of dazzlingly
bright liquid flame. The spell uses one fire source, which is
immediately extinguished. A fire larger than a 20-foot cube is
only partly extinguished. Magical fires are not extinguished, but
a creature of the fire subtype used as the source takes 1 point
of damage per caster level (no saving throw).

The coruscating rain of fire fills a hemispherical burst with a
radius of 60 feet. All creatures and objects in the area take 5d6
points of fire damage and catch on fire (*Core Rulebook*
444). Creatures who make successful Reflex saves take half damage
and don't catch on fire.  Creatures within 120 feet of the
original fire source are blinded for 1d4+1 rounds (Will negates).



## Fire of Entanglement


**School** evocation; **Level** paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 swift action

**Components** V, S

**Range** special; see text

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Reflex partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

The next creature you attack using your smite evil class ability
is wreathed in flames that impede its movement. Until the end of
the spell's duration, the target is entangled. If the target
starts its turn in a square adjacent to you, it is considered to
be entangled to an immobile object (you) and cannot move. A
target that saves against this spell is affected for only 1
round.



## Fire of Judgment


**School** evocation; **Level** paladin 3

**Casting Time** 1 swift action

**Components** V, S

**Range** special; see text

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Will partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

After casting this spell, the next creature you attack using your
smite evil class ability is engulfed in flames of positive
energy. At the start of its turn, the target takes 1d6 points of
damage, and takes an additional 1d6 points of damage each time it
attacks a creature other than you. If the creature is an outsider
with the evil subtype, an evil-aligned dragon, or an undead
creature this damage increases to 1d10. With a successful saving
throw, a creature is affected by this spell for only 1
round. This damage is divine in nature and bypasses any DR the
creature possesses.



## Fire of Vengeance


**School** evocation [fire]; **Level** paladin 4

**Casting Time** 1 swift action

**Components** V, S

**Range** special; see text

**Target** one creature

**Duration** see text

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance** no

After casting this spell, the next creature you attack using your
smite evil class ability is engulfed in holy flames that flare up
when the target attacks someone other than you. If at any time
during the duration of your smite evil effect the target makes an
attack that does not include you, it takes 3d8 points of fire
damage. Once triggered in this manner, or when your smite evil
ability expires, the spell ends.



## Fire Snake


**School** evocation [fire]; **Level** druid 5, sorcerer/wizard 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a snake scale)

**Range** 60 ft.

**Area** see text

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Reflex half; **Spell Resistance** yes

You create a sinuous line of flames that you may shape as
desired. The *[fire snake]* affects one 5-foot square per caster
level, and each square must be adjacent to the previous square,
starting with you. The *[fire snake]* may not extend beyond its
maximum range. Creatures in the path of the *[fire snake]* take
1d6 points of fire damage per caster level (maximum 15d6).



## Flames of the Faithful


**School** transmutation [fire]; **Level** inquisitor 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Range** touch

**Target** weapon touched

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (object, harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (object, harmless)

With a touch, you cause a glowing rune to appear on a single
weapon, granting that weapon the *[flaming]* property (and
allowing it to cause an extra 1d6 points of fire damage on a
successful hit). If you are using the judgment class feature,
your weapon gains the *[flaming burst]* property instead. The
spell functions only for weapons that you wield. If the weapon
leaves your hand for any reason, the spell effect ends. The
effects of this spell do not stack with any existing *[flaming]*
or *[flaming burst]* weapon property that the target weapon may
already possess.



## Flare Burst


**School**evocation (light); **Level**bard 1, druid 1,
  sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Components**V

**Range**close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect**10-ft.-radius burst of light

**Duration**instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance**yes

This spell functions as *[flare],* except it affects all
creatures in a 10-foot-radius burst from the target point.



## Fluid Form


**School** transmutation [water]; **Level** alchemist 4,
sorcerer/wizard 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S, M (a mixture of oil and water)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

When you cast this spell, your body takes on a slick, oily
appearance.  For the duration of this spell, your form can
stretch and shift with ease and becomes slightly transparent, as
if you were composed of liquid. This transparency is not enough
to grant concealment. You gain DR 10/slashing and your reach
increases by 10 feet. In addition, you can pass through small
holes or narrow openings, even mere cracks, with anything you
were carrying at the time the spell was cast (except other
creatures). Finally, you can move through water with a swim speed
of 60 feet and can breathe both water and air for the duration of
this effect.  You are treated as if you had the water subtype
while this spell is in effect.



## Fly


**School** transmutation; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 7

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, F (a wing feather)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature/level, no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

**Duration** 10 minutes/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

## Fly, Mass

This spell functions as *[fly]* (*Core Rulebook* 284), save that
it can target numerous creatures and lasts longer.



## Foe to Friend


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
  bard 5

**Casting Time** 1 immediate action

**Components** V, S

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** 1 round

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

Cast this spell when an enemy is about to make an attack against
an ally. The creature makes the attack against a valid target of
your choice instead or the attack is negated. In addition, the
target is considered an ally for determining flanking for 1
round.



## Follow Aura


**School** divination [chaotic, evil, good, or lawful]; **Level**
inquisitor 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 10 minutes/level (D)

Choose one alignment type: chaotic, evil, good, or lawful. You
gain the ability to follow the trail of a strong or overwhelming
aura of that alignment (see *[detect evil]*, *Core Rulebook*
266).  This is treated as tracking using the scent special
quality, except you are following the traces of their aura upon
the ground rather than their scent, and you receive no bonus on
[Perception] checks. At 10th level, you can track the trail of
creatures with a moderate alignment aura as well.

When you use this spell to track a given alignment, it gains the
descriptor of the opposite alignment. For example, when *[follow
aura]* is used to track evil, it gains the good descriptor.



## Fool's Forbiddance


**School** abjuration [mind-affecting]; **Level** bard 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a ring of keys)

**Range** 10 ft.

**Area** 10-ft.-radius spherical emanation centered on you

**Duration** concentration

**Saving Throw**Will partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

Through your antics and performance, you create an area of
warding that adversely affects all enemies that dare enter
it. When an enemy creature enters the area it must make an
immediate Will saving throw. If it fails, the creature is
confused as long as it is in the area and for 1 round after it
leaves. If it succeeds on the saving throw, the creature is
staggered as long as it is in the area and for 1 round after it
leaves.



## Forced Repentance


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
inquisitor 4, paladin 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one evil creature without the evil subtype

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You force an evil creature that does not have the evil subtype to
momentarily reflect on its past actions and be overcome by grief
and conscience. The target immediately drops prone and begins to
loudly confess all of its sins and transgressions to the caster
for the duration of the spell. The spell immediately ends if you
move out of line of sight or if the target is attacked.



## Frozen Note


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting, sonic];
**Level** bard 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Area** 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you

**Target** any number of creatures within area

**Duration** concentration (up to 1 round/level); see text

**Saving Throw** Will partial; see text; **Spell Resistance** yes

You produce and sustain a single perfect musical note that holds
nearby creatures, friend as well as foe, utterly spellbound until
you stop singing. Affected creatures are both paralyzed and
oblivious to their surroundings so long as you maintain the
note. Maintaining this note requires your absolute attention; if
you take damage or take any other action, including moving from
your current square, the spell instantly ends. Creatures that
succeed in their initial saving throw must make a new one for
each round they spend within the area of the spell until they
fail and become captivated. Creatures with 4 or more Hit Dice
greater than your caster level are not affected by this
spell. However, those with 4 or more Hit Dice less than your
caster level do not receive a saving throw to resist it. The note
is so clear and flawless that less than extraordinary attempts to
avoid hearing it merely grant targets a bonus on their saving
throws. Targets get a +2 circumstance bonus on their saving throw
for each barrier between your voice and their ears.  This
includes such things as a creature stopping up its ears with wax,
closing all windows and doors in a nearby building, or even
crawling into a barrel and pulling down the top. If a target that
had previously made its saving throw loses the benefit of one or
more of its barriers it must immediately make a new saving
throw. Similarly, any target that had previously failed its
saving throw gets a new save each time it gains the protection of
a barrier.



## Gallant Inspiration


**School** divination; **Level** bard 2

**Casting Time** 1 immediate action

**Components** V

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes

This word of arcane-empowered inspiration often ensures success
of a crucial endeavor. Cast this spell when a creature fails an
attack roll or skill check. The creature gains a +2d4 competence
bonus to the attack roll or skill check retroactively. If the
bonus is enough to turn the failure into a success, the roll
succeeds.



## Getaway


**School** conjuration (teleportation); **Level** bard 6,
sorcerer/wizard 6

**Casting Time** 1 minute

**Components** V, S, M (a brass doorknob)

**Range** unlimited

**Targets** you and one willing creature/2 levels, all of which
must be within 30 feet of you

**Duration** 1 hour/level

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

*[Getaway]* teleports you and allies you designate at the time of
casting to a predetermined location. You must initially cast the
spell at that location—all creatures affected by the spell must
be present at that time and within 30 feet of you. At any time
before the spell's duration expires, you may trigger the spell as
a swift action.  At this time, all affected creatures (or their
remains and gear) within 30 feet of you are teleported to the
location where you first cast the spell. Creatures more than 30
feet away from you are left behind.  Selected creatures within 30
feet of you who do not wish to travel with you at that time can
simply choose not to go. You can be transported any distance
within a plane but cannot travel between planes.



## Geyser


**School** conjuration (creation) [fire, water]; **Level** druid
4, sorcerer/wizard 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a piece of lava rock)

**Range** long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Effect** spout of boiling water filling a 5 ft. square and
spraying upward 10 ft./2 levels

**Duration** concentration + 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Reflex partial (see below); **Spell Resistance**
  no

You cause a column of boiling water to spring forth from any
horizontal surface, knocking over creatures directly over it and
exposing nearby creatures to searing droplets as its spray falls
back to the ground.

Any creature entering the *[geyser]*, or occupying the square it
appears in, must make a Reflex saving throw to avoid being hurled
into the air and then tossed to the ground. If the creature fails
its saving throw, it takes 3d6 points of fire damage from the
boiling water and also takes falling damage based upon the height
of the *[geyser]* is 50 feet tall, the creature takes 5d6 falling
damage), landing prone in a random square adjacent to the
*[geyser]*. A successful saving throw halves the damage and
negates the falling damage, and the creature is moved to the
closest square adjacent to the *[geyser]* (Large-sized or larger
creatures are moved enough so that they are not on top of the
geyser but still adjacent to it). This movement does not provoke
attacks of opportunity and does not count toward the creature's
normal movement.

In addition, the *[geyser]* sprays boiling water in a
hemispherical emanation around its square. The radius of this
emanation is equal to one-half the *[geyser]*'s height (e.g., a
50-foot *[geyser]. Any creature within this area, including
yourself, takes 1d6 points of fire damage each round as droplets
of boiling water cascade on them.

You can choose to make a smaller *[geyser]* than your level
permits if an obstruction prevents it from reaching its full
height, or if you simply want to create a spread of boiling rain
that's smaller than what would be created by a full-height
*[geyser]* spell.



## Ghostbane Dirge


**School** transmutation; **Level** bard 2, cleric 2, inquisitor
2, paladin 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (an old reed from a wind instrument)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one incorporeal creature

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

The target coalesces into a semi-physical form for a short period
of time. While subject to the spell, the incorporeal creature
takes half damage (50%) from nonmagical attack forms, and full
damage from magic weapons, spells, spell-like effects, and supernatural effects.

## Ghostbane Dirge, Mass

**School** transmutation; **Level** bard 4, cleric 5, inquisitor
5, paladin 3

**Target** one incorporeal creature/level, no two of which can be
more than 30 ft. apart

This spell functions as *[ghostbane dirge]*, except that it
affects multiple targets.



## Glide


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 2, ranger 1,
sorcerer/wizard 2, summoner 2, witch 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a leaf)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** until landing or 1 minute/level (D)

You take no damage from falls (as if from *[feather fall]*). In
addition, you can move up to 5 feet in any horizontal direction
for every 1 foot you fall, at a speed of 60 feet per round. You
cannot use this spell to actually gain height, merely coast in
other directions as you fall. If subjected to a strong wind or
any other effect that causes you to rise you can take advantage
of it in order to increase the distance you can glide. The spell
ends as soon as your feet touch the ground regardless of its
remaining duration. If the spell expires while you are still in
the air you fall the remaining distance as normal.



## Grace


**School** abjuration; **Level** cleric 2, paladin 1

**Casting Time** 1 swift action

**Components** V

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** see text

Until the end of your turn, your movement does not provoke
attacks of opportunity.



## Gravity Bow


**School** transmutation; **Level** ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level (D)

*[Gravity bow]* significantly increases the weight and density of
arrows or bolts fired from your bow or crossbow the instant
before they strike their target and then return them to normal a
few moments later. Any arrow fired from a bow or crossbow you are
carrying when the spell is cast deals damage as if one size
larger than it actually is. For instance, an arrow fired from a
Medium longbow normally deals 1d8 points of damage, but it would
instead deal 2d6 points of damage if fired from a *[gravity
bow]*. Only you can benefit from this spell. If anyone else uses
your bow to make an attack the arrows deal damage as normal for
their size.



## Grove of Respite


**School**conjuration (creation); **Level**druid 4, ranger 4

**Casting Time**10 minutes

**Component**V, S, M/DF (a leaf or blade of grass and a drop of
  water)

**Range**close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect** 20-ft.-radius grove

**Duration**2 hours/level (D)

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance**no

You conjure a sheltered grove of trees surrounding a shallow
spring. The grove appears from nowhere even in the most barren,
rocky soil regardless of season, but the spell must be cast
outside on open ground.

The area within the grove is temperate and comfortable, like that
of a *[tiny hut],* although the grove provides no illumination
and provides no protection from the elements.  The water in the
grove's spring is clean and drinkable. Additionally, the trees
provide a variety of ripe fruit, regardless of season, which acts
as a *[goodberry]*spell for up to eight people. The grove is
warded with an *[alarm]* spell that alerts you whenever any
creature enters the area. Once the spell expires, the grove
vanishes, including all fruit, water, and other materials from
it, although any nourishment or healing gained from its effects
remains.



## Guiding Star


**School** divination; **Level** cleric 3, ranger 2, witch 3

**Casting Time** 1 minute

**Components** V, S, M (a spool of thread or string)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 day/level (D)

You form a bond with your surroundings when you cast this
spell. For the remaining duration of the spell you can always, as
a standard action, determine your approximate distance from that
area as well as the direction you must travel in order to reach
it. You cannot determine the location of the area if you are on a
different plane. The area counts as ”very familiar” for the
purposes of *[teleport]* or similar spells.  You can only attune
yourself to one location at a time. If you cast the spell at
another spot you lose the ability to locate your original area.



## Heroic Finale


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
  bard 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes
(harmless)

You must have a bardic performance in effect to cast this
spell. With a flourish, you immediately end the performance, and
one creature within range affected by your bardic performance can
make a move action or a standard action of their choice.



## Hero's Defiance


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** paladin 1

**Casting Time** 1 immediate action

**Components** V

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** instantaneous

The instant before you are reduced to 0 or fewer hit points, you
can expend a use of your lay on hands ability to heal yourself as
if you had used lay on hands, plus an additional 1d6 hit
points. If this healing brings your hit point total above 0 hit
points, you do not fall, and may continue to act. If you have no
more uses of lay on hands this spell has no effect.



## Hidden Speech


**School** transmutation [language-dependent]; **Level** bard 2,
inquisitor 3, witch 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a cipher written on a piece of
  parchment)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** you plus one creature/level, no two of which can be
more than 30 ft. apart

**Duration** 10 minutes/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
  yes

You greatly enhance the ability of the subjects to communicate
hidden messages to each other. Each target gains a +10 competence
bonus on [Bluff] checks to send secret message to other
recipients. Others using opposed [Sense Motive] checks to
decipher these messages receive a -5 penalty. All subjects
affected by the spell must share a language to be able to pass
messages.



## Hide Campsite


**School** illusion (glamer); **Level** druid 3, ranger 2

**Casting Time** 10 minutes

**Components** V, S, M (a sprig of mistletoe, and a vial of
  quicksilver)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Area**one 20-ft. cube

**Duration** 2 hours/level (D)

**Saving Throw**Will disbelief (if interacted with); **Spell
Resistance** no

You make the area around a campsite appear to be a thicket of
untouched and forbidding foliage, or some other unwelcoming
feature matching the surrounding terrain. Creatures outside the
area cannot sense any activity going on inside the area—they
cannot smell campfires or cooking food, they cannot hear
conversation, loud noises, or spells being cast, and they cannot
even feel heat or a rush of wind coming from the area.  Those
inside the area can see out normally. Once a creature steps into
the area of the spell, it can see everything in and around the
area normally.



## Holy Whisper


**School** evocation [good]; **Level** paladin 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 30 ft.

**Area**cone-shaped burst

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates; see text; **Spell Resistance**
  yes

You whisper a single word in the primordial language of good that
is anathema to the minions of evil and strengthens the resolve of
good creatures. Evil creatures within the burst must make a
Fortitude saving throw or become sickened for 1 round/level. Evil
outsiders with the evil subtype, evil-aligned dragons, and undead
in the burst also take 2d8 points of damage if they fail their
saves. Good-aligned creatures in the burst gain a +2 sacred bonus
on attack and damage rolls for 1 round.



## Honeyed Tongue


**School** transmutation; **Level** bard 2, inquisitor 2, paladin
  1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, M/DF (a drop of honey)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 10 minutes/level

This spell augments your diplomacies. While under the effects of
spell, you roll two dice each time you make a [Diplomacy] check
to change a creature's attitude, taking the highest roll. If this
results in a roll low enough to reduce the creature's attitude by
a step, that creature gets some clue that you are manipulating it
with a spell. Alternatively you can cast this spell before making
a [Diplomacy] check to gather information, gaining a +5
competence bonus on the check.



## Hungry Pit


**School** conjuration (creation); **Level** sorcerer/wizard 5,
summoner 5

**Saving Throw** Reflex negates; Reflex half; see text; **Spell
Resistance** no

This spell functions as *[create pit]*, except that the pit has
the ability to squeeze and crush any creature trapped within it
and has a maximum depth of 100 feet. Creatures who fall into the
hole take falling damage as normal. In addition, anyone within
the pit, not just those on the bottom, takes 4d6 points of
bludgeoning damage each round as the pit contracts and then
returns to its normal size (a successful Reflex save halves this
damage). The ever-shifting walls of the pit are quite difficult
to scale and have a [Climb] DC of 35.



## Hunter's Eye


**School** divination; **Level** inquisitor 3, ranger 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

Sharpening your perceptive abilities and tuning them against
obfuscating effects, *[hunter's eye]* greatly enhances your
senses against the target creature. You gain the ability to
perceive the target when it is invisible or ethereal as though
using the *[see invisibility]* spell, and receive a +20
competence bonus on [Perception] checks to locate the target. You
ignore concealment provided by fog or mist, *[blur]*,
*[displacement]*, *[invisibility]*, and similar effects affecting
the target, but not concealment provided by darkness. This spell
provides no benefits to your allies, and no benefits against
creatures other than the target.



## Hunter's Howl


**School** necromancy [fear, mind-affecting]; **Level** ranger 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 20 ft.

**Area** 20-ft.-radius burst

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance** none

With a single primal howl, you strike fear in your
opponents. Until the end of the spell's duration, you treat those
affected by it as if they were your favored enemy, gaining a +2
bonus on weapon attack and damage rolls against them, and a +2
bonus on [Bluff], [Knowledge], [Perception], [Sense Motive], and
[Survival] checks against them. If an affected creature is
already one of your favored enemies, it is shaken instead. This
is a mind-affecting fear effect.



## Hydraulic Push


**School** evocation [water]; **Level** druid 1, sorcerer/wizard
  1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature or object

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You call forth a quick blast of water that knocks over and soaks
one creature or square. You can use this blast of water to make a
bull rush against any one creature or object. Your CMB for this
bull rush is equal to your caster level plus your Intelligence,
Wisdom, or Charisma modifier, whichever is highest. This bull
rush does not provoke an attack of opportunity. *[Hydraulic
push]* extinguishes any normal fires on a creature, object, or in
a single 5-foot square which it is targeted against. Magical
fires are unaffected.



## Hydraulic Torrent


**School** evocation [water]; **Level** druid 3, sorcerer/wizard
  3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 60 ft.

**Area** 60-ft. line

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You call forth a powerful stream of water that batters all
creatures and obstacles in its path until it strikes something it
cannot push past.  Against creatures and moveable objects this
stream acts as a bull rush.  You can bull rush creatures of any
size, not just those one size larger than your own. Make a combat
maneuver check and apply its results to each creature within the
area. Your CMB for this bull rush is equal to your caster level
plus your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma modifier, whichever
is highest. This bull rush does not provoke an attack of
opportunity.

Against immovable objects this stream instead allows you to make
a Strength check to destroy the target. When attempting to break
an object, the stream has an effective Strength equal to your
caster level plus the ability score modifier as above. The Break
DC depends on the object you're trying to break—see [Breaking
Items].

*[Hydraulic torrent]* extinguishes any normal fires it encounters
along its path. Magical fires are unaffected.



## Ill Omen


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
  witch 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (hair from a black cat)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round/level or until discharged

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You afflict the target with bad luck. On the next d20 roll the
target makes, it must roll twice and take the less favorable
result. For every five caster levels you have, the target must
roll twice on an additional d20 roll (to a maximum of five rolls
at 20th level).

A target who can speak and has at least one free hand and who is
aware of the spell and its effects (such as from a [Spellcraft]
check to identify the spell as it is cast) can negate one reroll
by spending a move action to utter a brief prayer or good luck
charm to appease the spirits of ill fortune.



## Innocence


**School**transmutation; **Level**bard 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S

**Range**personal

**Target**you

**Duration**1 minute/level (D)

You surround yourself with an aura of innocence and
trustworthiness. You gain a +10 competence bonus on [Bluff] skill
checks to convince others of your innocence. They find it
difficult to believe you capable of any wrongdoing. This bonus
does not apply to other uses of the [Bluff] skill, such as
feinting in combat, creating a diversion to hide, or
communicating secret messages via innuendo, nor does it apply to
any use of the skill to convince anyone of anything other than
your complete innocence and blamelessness.



## Instant Armor


**School** conjuration (creation) [force]; **Level** cleric 2,
  paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level (D)

You instantly wrap your body in a suit of armor made from opaque
force.  At your option, the armor can be decorated with your
religion's holy symbol in a prominent place, such as upon the
breastplate or helm. While it exists, this armor replaces any
garments or other sort of armor worn, magical as well as
mundane. You lose access to, and all benefits from, armor
replaced by this spell until the spell ends and the instant armor
disappears.

*[Instant armor]* acts in all ways as armor typical of its type
(armor bonus, maximum Dexterity bonus, arcane spell failure
chance, and so on). Since *[instant armor]* is made of force,
incorporeal creatures can't bypass it the way they do normal
armor. The sort of armor you can create with this spell depends
on your caster level.

  Caster Level Armor Created ---------------- --------------- 5th
  or lower chainmail 6th-8th banded mail 9th-11th half-plate 12th
  or higher full plate

If you choose to create lesser armor than your level allows you
gain a +1 magical enhancement bonus to the armor you do create
for every type of armor you pass over. For instance, if you have
the capacity to create full plate *[instant armor]* you could
instead choose to create *+1 half-plate*, *+2 banded mail*, or
*+3 chainmail*. You cannot replace these bonuses with armor
special properties.



## Instant Enemy


**School**enchantment; **Level** ranger 3

**Casting Time** 1 swift action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature that is not your favored enemy.

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance** no

With this spell you designate the target as your favored enemy
for the remainder of its duration. Select one of your favored
enemy types. For the duration of the spell, you treat the target
as if it were that type of favored enemy for all purposes.



## Invigorate


**School**illusion [figment]; **Level**bard 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V

**Range**touch

**Target**creature touched

**Duration**10 minutes/level (D)

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**yes
(harmless)

This spell banishes feelings of weariness. For the duration, the
subject takes no penalties from the fatigued or exhausted
conditions. The effect of *[invigorate]* is merely an illusion,
however, not a substitute for actual rest or respite. When the
spell ends, the subject takes 1d6 points of nonlethal damage,
along with the return of the original condition(s). A creature
can be under the effects of only one *[invigorate]* spell at a
time; if it is cast a second time on that creature, the first
effect immediately ends.

## Invigorate, Mass

**School**illusion [figment]; **Level**bard 3

**Targets**creatures touched, up to one/level

This spell work as *[invigorate],* except it affects multiple
creatures.



## Jester's Jaunt


**School**conjuration (teleportation); **Level** bard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** touch

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** instantiations

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You teleport the target to a space you can see within 30 feet of
the target. The destination must be on solid ground, and the
teleportation cannot end in a space that is by nature hazardous
to the creature you are teleporting.



## Keen Senses


**School**transmutation; **Level**alchemist 1, druid 1, ranger 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Components**V, M/DF (a hawk's feather)

**Range**touch

**Target**creature touched

**Duration**1 minute/level (D)

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**yes
(harmless)

The subject gains a +2 competence bonus on [Perception] checks
and gains low-light vision. Subjects that have low-light vision
double the distance they can see under the effects of this spell.



## King's Castle


**School** conjuration (teleportation); **Level** paladin 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes
(harmless)

This spell allows you to switch places with an ally. When you
cast this spell, choose a single ally within range. You teleport
to your ally's space while your ally teleports to your former
space.



## Knight's Calling


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
paladin 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You compel an enemy to come and fight you. On its turn, the
target moves its speed toward you, avoiding any other dangers
along its path (including any movement that would provoke attacks
of opportunity). The target may do nothing but move on its
turn. If the target ends its move adjacent to you, you can make
an attack of opportunity against the target.



## Lead Blades


**School** transmutation; **Level** ranger 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** personal

**Target** touch

**Duration** 1 minute/level (D)

*[Lead blades]* increases the momentum and density of your melee
weapons just as they strike a foe. All melee weapons you are
carrying when the spell is cast deal damage as if one size
category larger than they actually are. For instance, a Medium
longsword normally deals 1d8 points of damage, but it would
instead deal 2d6 points of damage if benefiting from *[lead
blades]*. Only you can benefit from this spell. If anyone else
uses one of your weapons to make an attack it deals damage as
normal for its size.



## Life Bubble


**School** abjuration; **Level** cleric 5, druid 4, ranger 3,
sorcerer/wizard 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a bit of eggshell)

**Range** touch

**Target** creatures touched, up to one/level

**Duration** 2 hours/level; see text

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

You surround the touched creatures with a constant and moveable
1-inch shell of tolerable living conditions. This shell enables
the subjects to breathe freely, even underwater or in a vacuum,
as well as making them immune to harmful gases and vapors,
including inhaled diseases and poisons and spells like
*[cloudkill]* and *[stinking cloud]*. In addition, the shell
protects subjects from extremes of temperature (per *[endure
elements]*) as well as extremes of pressure.

*[Life bubble]* does not provide protection from negative or
positive energy (such as found on the Negative and Positive
Energy planes), the ability to see in conditions of poor
visibility (such as in smoke or fog), nor the ability to move or
act normally in conditions that impede movement (such as
underwater).

When you cast this spell it has a total duration of 2 hours per
caster level. You can divide this duration up in any manner you
wish, not necessarily equally, between up to 1 creature per
caster level.



## Light Lance


**School** evocation [good, light]; **Level** paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** personal

**Effect** lance of light

**Duration** 1 round + 1 round/level (D)

You create a glorious beam of brilliant radiance that acts as a
*+1 [holy] lance* suitable for your size. You must have a free
hand when casting the spell and, once you call the lance into
being, you cannot switch it to another hand or put it down
without prematurely ending the spell. As a standard action while
holding a *[light lance]*, you can choose not to make an attack
and instead hold the lance aloft as a beacon of light and truth,
creating an area of bright light with a radius of 90 feet. If you
choose to do this for one or more additional rounds the lance
also casts a spear of brilliant light up into the sky that grows
progressively more visible as it continues to climb toward the
heavens. Under cover of night or other darkness, if nothing
obstructs the beam, it becomes visible for an additional 2 miles
during each round in which you continue to aim your lance skyward
(2 miles in the second round, 4 miles in the third round, and so
on).



## Lily Pad Stride


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a frog's leg)

**Range** long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Effect** trail of lily pads behind you

**Duration** 10 minutes/level (D); see text

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

Your every footstep creates aquatic plants capable of supporting
your weight and that of any creature of your size or smaller that
is following you. These lily pads only appear when you cross
water or other liquids which do not immediately destroy
plants. You can walk across these liquid surfaces without any
fear of stumbling (though if knocked prone, dragged under, or
otherwise pulled off your feet you still sink in the liquid). For
the duration of the spell, any creature of your size or smaller
can attempt to follow you by making a DC 10 [Acrobatics] check
every round. Each such check allows it to move at half its normal
land speed.  If the creature takes a -5 penalty on its check it
can move at its normal speed. If a creature fails an [Acrobatics]
check, or if a creature that's larger than you attempts to
follow, it falls through, damaging the plants. Each time a
creature falls through, all subsequent creatures take a
cumulative -5 penalty on their [Acrobatics] checks when traveling
across that particular stretch of plants. As you move, the lily
pads disappear behind you once you pass beyond the spell's range.
Otherwise, they remain until the spell's duration expires.



## Lockjaw


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 2, ranger 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (sticky tree gum)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You give a creature the ability to use one of its natural attacks
to firmly attach itself to an opponent. Choose one of the
creature's natural attacks (usually a claw or bite attack). The
creature gains the grab ability with that natural attack,
including the +4 bonus on combat maneuver checks to start or
maintain a grapple. A creature with multiple natural attacks can
strike at its grappled opponent with its other natural attacks,
but cannot attack any other creature.



## Marks Of Forbiddance


**School** abjuration [mind-affecting]; **Level** paladin 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets**one enemy and one ally

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Will negates; see text; **Spell Resistance** yes

*Marks of [Forbiddance]*magically brand two creatures, preventing
them from committing violence against one another. When you cast
this spell choose one enemy and one ally within range. Both
targets become branded with the sigil of forbiddance.  Until the
end of the spell's duration, in order for the two targets to
attack one another, even with a targeted spell, each attacker
must attempt a Will save. If the save succeeds, that target can
attack the other normally. If the save fails, the target can't
follow through with the attack and the action is lost. This spell
does not prevent the targets from attacking each other with area
of effect spells or abilities.



## Mask Dweomer


**School** illusion (glamer); **Level** witch 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a piece of gauze)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature or object touched

**Duration** 1 day/level (D)

**Saving Throw** none; see text; **Spell Resistance** no

You mask and manipulate a spell's magic aura to make it harder to
detect. Select one spell effect on the target creature or
object. You must have either cast this spell yourself or have
perceived it by means such as *[detect magic]* or *[arcane
sight]*. Both the desired spell effect and *[mask dweomer]* are
hidden from *[detect magic]*, although more powerful spells (such
as *[arcane sight]*) pierce the deception if the caster succeeds
on a Will save. *[Analyze dweomer]* automatically detects both
*[mask dweomer]* and any masked spell effects.



## Memory Lapse


**School** enchantment [mind-affecting]; **Level** bard 1,
sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You cause the target to forget what happened from the casting of
the spell back to the beginning of its last turn. This may allow
a retry on a [Diplomacy], [Intimidate], or opposed skill check,
though only with respect to the target, not other creatures that
may be present.



## Moonstruck


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4, witch 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a pinch of powdered moonstone )

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** one humanoid creature

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You invoke the mystical power of the moon to drive the target
into a mad, bestial frenzy. If the target fails its save, it is
dazed for 1 round, dropping held items as its nails and teeth
elongate and sharpen.  The target gains a bite attack and two
claw attacks that deal damage appropriate for the creature's
size, and for the remainder of the spell's duration the target
behaves as if under simultaneous *[rage]* and *[confusion]*
spells, attacking with its natural weapons in preference to other
actions. During the final round of the spell's duration, the
target is again dazed as it returns to its normal state.



## Nap Stack


**School** necromancy; **Level** cleric 3

**Casting Time** 1 minute

**Components** V, S, M (a little silk pillow worth 100 gp)

**Range** 30 ft.

**Area** 30-ft.-radius emanation

**Duration** 8 hours

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

You reduce the amount of uninterrupted sleep or rest creatures
within the spell's area need in order to recover from injuries,
regain spells, or other special abilities to 2 hours instead of
the normal eight. In addition, if creatures continue to sleep or
rest beyond the initial 2 hours, every additional 2 hours counts
as a day of rest for the purpose of recovering hit points,
ability damage, as well as for enduring diseases, poisons, or
other afflictions. This means 8 total hours of sleep counts as 4
days for natural healing and for saving throws as diseases or
similar afflictions run their course. When suffering from
diseases, poison, or other afflictions, sleepers experience vivid
dreams that help them track their recovery. If things go poorly
they can, at any time, wake themselves up in order to seek a
better alternative. If awoken or otherwise disturbed during this
8-hour period, creatures may return to sleep but they no longer
enjoy the benefits of the accelerated recovery time. Creatures
can only enjoy the benefits of this spell once in any 1-week
period.



## Natural Rhythm


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a handful of pebbles dropped one by one
onto the ground)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

You enhance a creature's ability to harm an opponent based on the
number of times it has already injured that opponent with a
natural attack.  Each time the creature successfully strikes an
opponent with a natural attack, the subject gains a cumulative +1
bonus on damage rolls made against that opponent when making
natural attacks (maximum +5 bonus). If an attack misses, the
bonus to damage for all attacks resets to +0.



## Nature's Exile


**School**transmutation; **Level**druid 3, witch 3

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S, DF

**Range**touch

**Target**creature touched

**Duration**permanent

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance**yes

This spell curses the creature touched, making it inimical to the
natural world. All animals have an initial attitude of hostile
toward the target. Familiars, being magical beasts, are not
affected by this spell, but animal companions are. If you have an
animal companion, it does not become hostile, but as long as you
remain cursed, your animal companion takes a -2 penalty on all
attack rolls, skill checks, and saving throws. The target also
takes a -10 penalty on [Survival] skill checks as the weather and
environment themselves seem to conspire to cause trouble.

*[Nature's exile]* can be removed with *[break enchantment]*,
*[limited wish]*, [miracle]*, *[remove curse]*, or [wish]*.



## Negate Aroma


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 1, druid 1, ranger
  1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a pinch of alum)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature or object/level touched

**Duration** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

With a gesture, this spell allows you to dismiss even the foulest
or most distinctive scents. When cast, the targeted creatures or
objects lose all natural and unnatural odors. A creature under
the effect of *[negate aroma]* cannot be tracked, located, or
pinpointed by the scent special quality. In addition, this spell
prevents the target creature from using the stench special
ability and similar odor-based abilities (such as those possessed
by troglodytes).

*[Negate aroma]* does not prevent the target from acquiring
outside smells or odors. Dowsing the creature with a pungent
substance effectively negates the benefits of the spell until the
substance is neutralized or washed away.



## Oath of Peace


**School** abjuration; **Level** paladin 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level

Entreating your deity for aid, you make a temporary oath of
peace, granting you superior defenses but means you can't attack
for the duration of the oath. For as long as you are subject to
this spell, you gain a +5 sacred bonus to AC and on saving
throws, as well as DR 10/evil. If you make a direct or indirect
attack or any show any hostility toward any creature, the spell
immediately ends.



## Oracle's Burden


**School** necromancy; **Level** oracle 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You entreat the forces of fate to bestow your oracle's curse upon
another creature. The target creature suffers all the hindrances
and none of the benefits of your oracle's curse class
feature. You still suffer all effects of your oracle's curse. If
you do not have the oracle's curse class feature, this spell has
no effect.



## Pain Strike


**School**evocation [evil]; **Level**sorcerer/wizard 3, witch 3

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Components**V, S

**Range**close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target**one living creature

**Duration**1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance**yes

*[Pain strike]* racks the targeted creature with agony, inflicting
1d6 points of nonlethal damage per round for 1 round per level
(maximum 10 rounds). Additionally, the affected creature is
sickened for the spell's duration, and the caster gains a +4
circumstance bonus on [Intimidate] checks against the target.

## Pain Strike, Mass

**School**evocation [evil]; **Level**sorcerer/wizard 5, witch 5

**Targets**one living creature/level, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

This spell works like *[pain strike],*except as noted above.



## Paladin's Sacrifice


**School** abjuration; **Level** paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 immediate action

**Components** V, DF

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You open up a brief but powerful divine conduit between you and
another creature, taking on the damage and any other effects that
creature suffers. When a creature in range is hit by an attack or
fails a saving throw, you can cast this spell and the wounds
and/or effects are magically transmitted to you instead of the
target. You are affected as if you were hit by the attack or
failed the saving throw, taking all the damage and suffering all
of the adverse effects. Any resistances or immunities you have
are applied normally, but you cannot otherwise reduce or negate
the damage or effects in any way.

If you use this spell against an effect that also targets you or
includes you in its area, you suffer the effects for both
yourself and the target you spared, potentially taking damage or
suffering other consequences twice.



## Perceive Cues


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 2, inquisitor 2,
ranger 2, witch 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a drop of water)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 10 minutes/level

Your senses become preternaturally keen, and you gain insight
into subtle behavioral cues. For the duration of the spell, you
receive a +5 competence bonus on [Perception] and [Sense Motive]
checks.



## Phantasmal Revenge


**School** illusion (phantasm) [fear, mind-affecting]; **Level**
sorcerer/wizard 7

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** touch and unlimited; see text

**Target** dead body touched

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will disbelief then Fortitude partial; see text;
**Spell Resistance** yes

When you cast this eerie spell upon a recently slain creature,
you cause a ghastly, spectral image of it to rise up from its
corpse, shrieking for vengeance before it vanishes in a burst of
unnatural light. This phantom then unerringly seeks out the
creature that killed it, as long as that creature is on the same
plane, and tries to slay its killer in turn.

Only the corpse's killer can see the phantasmal image created by
this spell. You and any others who witness the spell's casting or
its ultimate effects see only a vague shape. The target first
gets a Will save to disbelieve the illusion. If that save fails,
the target must succeed on Fortitude saving throw or take 10
points of damage per caster level from the phantasmal image. Even
if the Fortitude save is successful, the target takes 5d6 points
of damage + 1 point of damage per caster level. You know
immediately if the spell succeeded or failed to kill its target
but gain no other information, including the identity of the
target of the spell.

The creature providing the corpse must have died no more than 1
day per caster level prior to the casting of this spell. If the
creature that provided the corpse was not, in fact, killed by
another, or if the killer is dead or no longer on the same plane,
the spell fails.  *[Phantasmal revenge]* makes no moral
judgments; it targets winners of fair fights just as easily as
murderers. Any given body can only be targeted by a *[phantasmal
revenge]* spell once.



## Phantasmal Web


**School** illusion (phantasm) [mind-affecting]; **Level** bard
5, sorcerer/wizard 5

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** one creature/level, no two of which may be more than
30 ft.  apart

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Will disbelief, then Fortitude partial; see
**text; Spell Resistance** yes

You implant within the minds of your targets the illusion that
they are engulfed in tangled webs teeming with swarms of tiny
spiders. Those who fail to disbelieve the *[phantasmal web]* are
treated as if in a *[web]* spell, but must also make a Fortitude
save at the beginning of each turn or become nauseated for that
round by the phantasmal spiders.

As the *[phantasmal web]* exists only in the minds of the
targets, it cannot be burned or destroyed, and it provides no
cover (though it does provide concealment) against attacks made
by the targets. Targets cannot escape the *[phantasmal web]* by
moving, even by *teleportation*. *[Freedom of movement]* allows
unobstructed movement but does not negate the concealment or
nausea effects.

Targets of the spell perceive everyone else around them to be
engulfed in webs and swarming spiders, but the spell has no
visible effect to other creatures (who may assist allies to
disbelieve the effect).



## Pied Piping


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting, sonic];
**Level** bard 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V or F (musical instrument)

**Range** 90 ft.

**Area** 90-ft.-radius emanation, centered on you

**Duration** concentration + 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Will partial; see text; **Spell Resistance** yes

You call forth a melody so compelling and attractive that
creatures belonging to a group with a specific, identifiable
physical trait (such as type, subtype, age, gender, or hair
color) find it almost impossible not to approach and follow
you. You choose the nature of the creatures you seek to attract
when you cast the spell and, once you make this choice, cannot
alter it. You can only use physical traits to determine your
audience. You can never use social and other more voluntary
criteria (such as alignment, religion, nationality, or class) to
select targets for this spell.

Eligible creatures must make a saving throw each round spent
within the area of the spell and, once they fail, approach you at
their normal movement speed and stand as close to you as possible
without actually entering an occupied square. If you move, they
do their best to maintain their proximity to you and
follow. Affected creatures can take no actions other than
listening to your music and following you if you move. Those
entering the area while the spell is in effect must also
successfully save or be compelled to come to you.

The attractive power of the spell does not cause affected
creatures to put themselves in jeopardy and they have enough
presence of mind to avoid or negotiate around obstacles and other
perilous hazards. If unable to approach or follow you without
endangering themselves, they simply wait, swaying to the music,
until you pass out of range, at which point they regain their
senses after 1 round/caster level. If circumstances change once
you move out of range, making it possible for affected creatures
to resume their attempts to get near you they do so, and, if they
manage to return to within the area of the spell before it wears
off, the spell continues as normal. If attacked, affected
creatures can take defensive measures, even going so far as to
avoid existing threats by moving out of the area of the spell,
but cannot make attacks themselves or take any other actions
until the effects of the spell wear off. The effects of the spell
persist for 1 round/caster level even after you stop
concentrating. Once the spell ceases, the affected creatures
continue to stay near you until the effects of the spell wear
off.



## Pillar of Life


**School** conjuration (healing) [light]; **Level** cleric 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect** 5-ft.-square pillar of positive energy, 20 ft. high

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You conjure a pillar of positive energy in a single 5-foot square
within range that radiates light as if it were a sunrod. Living
creatures adjacent to the pillar can spend a standard action to
touch the pillar and heal 2d8 points of damage + 1 point per
caster level (maximum +20).  Creatures can move into the square
containing the pillar, but if an undead creature moves into the
pillar it takes 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum
10d6). Undead creatures vulnerable to bright light take 1d8
points if damage per caster level (maximum 10d8). A creature
cannot benefit or suffer more than once from a single casting of
this spell.



## Planar Adaptation


**School**transmutation; **Level**alchemist 5, cleric 4,
sorcerer/wizard 5, summoner 5

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V

**Range**personal

**Target**you

**Duration**1 hour/level (D)

*[Planar adaptation]*grants you immunity to the harmful
environmental effects of a particular plane of existence,
including such hazards as toxicity, extreme temperatures, and
lack of air. Additionally, you gain energy resistance 20 to a
single energy type prevalent on that plane (choose one if more
than one type is equally prevalent). *[Planar adaptation]* has no
effect when cast upon your native plane.

**Planar Adaptation, Mass**

**Level**cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 7, summoner 6

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Components**V, S

**Range**close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets**one creature/level, no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**yes
(harmless)

This spell functions like *[planar adaptation]*, except as noted
above.



## Pox Pustules


**School** necromancy; **Level** druid 2, witch 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (leaves from a toxic plant)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You inflict a painful, itching rash on the target creature. The
target is sickened and takes a -4 penalty to Dexterity (this
penalty cannot lower Dexterity below 0). The target can spend a
move action scratching furiously at the rash to remove the
sickened condition (but not the Dexterity penalty) until the
start of its next turn.



## Protective Spirit


**School** conjuration (creation); **Level** ranger 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target**you

**Duration** 1 round/level

A *[protective spirit]* is an invisible, mindless, shapeless
force that hovers about you, defending you against unexpected
attacks. When a creature makes an attack of opportunity against
you, the *[protective spirit]* makes an immediate attack using
your base attack bonus plus your Dexterity modifier. On a
successful hit, the spirit does no damage, but it causes the
attack of opportunity to automatically miss. A *[protective
spirit]* can defend against a number of attacks of opportunity
equal to your Dexterity bonus (minimum 1) per round.

A *[protective spirit]* occupies your space, and moves with
you. It cannot be attacked or harmed by physical attacks, but
*[dispel magic]*, *[disintegrate]*, a *sphere of annihilation*,
or a *[rod of cancellation]* affects it. A *[protective
spirit]*'s AC against touch attacks is 10 + your Dexterity
modifier.



## Purging Finale


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** bard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes
(harmless)

You must have a bardic performance in effect to cast this
spell. With a flourish, you immediately end your bardic
performance, removing one of the following conditions on a
creature within range affected by your bardic performance:
cowering, dazzled, exhausted, paralyzed, shaken, or stunned.



## Purified Calling


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** summoner 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a stick of incense)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute

Your eidolon is restored to full health when you summon it. Upon
casting this spell, you must immediately begin the ritual to
summon your eidolon. Upon completion of the ritual, your eidolon
appears at full hit points and without any damage or penalties to
its ability scores, regardless of its previous condition. In
addition, any temporary negative conditions affecting your
eidolon are immediately removed.  Permanent conditions and
ability drain are not affected by this spell.



## Putrefy Food and Drink


**School** transmutation; **Level** witch 0

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 10 ft.

**Target** 1 cu. ft./level of food and water or one potion; see
  text

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will negates (object); **Spell Resistance** yes
(object)

This spell causes otherwise edible food to rot and spoil
instantly, and water and other liquids to become brackish and
undrinkable. Holy water and similar food and drink of
significance are spoiled by *[putrefy food and drink]*, but the
spell has no effect on creatures of any type, nor upon unholy
water. Water weighs about 8 pounds per gallon. One cubic foot of
water contains roughly 8 gallons and weighs about 60 pounds.

Although potions and elixirs are unaffected by the normal use of
the spell, you can instead choose to target a single such object
with this spell, destroying it if it fails a saving throw.



## Rally Point


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [good, mind-affecting];
**Level** paladin 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** 5 ft.

**Area** one 5-ft. square

**Duration** 1 minute/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

You create a spot that has the power to briefly hearten any good
creature who comes into contact with it. A good creature who
enters this square (even if simply as part of its normal move)
gains a +2 morale bonus on attacks, saving throws, and 2
temporary hit points per caster level for 1 round. Nongood
creatures gain no benefit from this spell. A creature cannot
benefit more than once from the same casting of this spell.



## Rampart


**School** conjuration (creation) [earth]; **Level** druid 7,
sorcerer/wizard 7

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a handful of earth)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect** 10-ft.-high earthen wall, in a line up to 10
ft. long/2 levels, or a circle with radius of up to 3 ft. + 1
ft./level

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You create a massive rampart of hard-packed earth and stone 5
feet thick. The *[rampart]* cannot be conjured so that it
occupies the same space as another creature or object. Each
5-foot-wide section of the *[rampart]* has hardness 0 and 180 hit
points. A section of the *[rampart]* whose hit points drop to 0
is breached. If a creature tries to break through the *[rampart]*
with a single attack, the DC for the Strength check is 60. A
creature can climb over the *[rampart]* with a DC 20 [Climb]
check.



## Rebuke


**School** evocation [sonic]; **Level** inquisitor 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** 20 ft.

**Area** 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

Your wrathful words cause physical harm to your enemies. Your
enemies take 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum
5d8) and are staggered for 1 round. Half of this damage is sonic
damage, but the other half results directly from divine power and
is therefore not subject to being reduced by resistance to
sonic-based attacks.  *[Rebuke]* is especially devastating to
foes who worship your god, inflicting 1d6 points of damage per
caster level (maximum 10d6) and stunning them for 1d4 rounds. A
successful Fortitude save halves the damage and negates the
staggering or stunning effect.

Enemies do not need to hear a *[rebuke]* to be harmed by it, but
it is negated by magical silence.



## Rejuvenate Eidolon


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** summoner 3

This spell functions as *[lesser rejuvenate eidolon]*, except
that it cures 3d10 points


## of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10).


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** summoner 5

This spell functions as *[lesser rejuvenate eidolon]*, except
that it cures 5d10 points


## of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20).


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** summoner 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a drop of your blood)

**Range** touch

**Target** eidolon touched

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

By laying your hand upon an eidolon, you cause its wounds to
close and its form to solidify. This spell cures 1d10 points of
damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +5).



## Residual Tracking


**School** divination; **Level** ranger 1

**Casting Time** 1 minute

**Components** V, S, M (a bit of plaster)

**Range** touch

**Target** footprint touched

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

By touching a footprint, you receive a clear mental image of the
person or creature that made it. The image has the exact same
appearance as the creature that made the footprint at the moment
it made the imprint, including any telling features or
expressions, any gear or equipment, or anything else the creature
was carrying at the time. For example, the footprint of a horse
would reveal both the horse and any creature riding it when it
made the footprint.



## Resounding Blow


**School** evocation [sonic]; **Level** antipaladin 4, inquisitor
5, paladin 4

**Casting Time** 1 swift action

**Components** V

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial; see text; **Spell
  Resistance** no

You must have a melee weapon in hand to cast this spell. On a
successful melee attack, your weapon resounds with a thunderous
clash. The target takes 1d6 points of sonic damage. Your weapon
is not harmed by this attack.

If you are using your judgment ability or smite ability against
the target, it is staggered for 1 round on a successful attack. A
successful Fortitude save negates the staggering effect.

On a successful critical hit, the target is stunned for 1 round
and deafened for 1d6 rounds. A successful Fortitude save negates
the stunning and deafening effects. If you are also using
judgment or smite, your foe makes only a single save against all
effects.

This spell immediately ends if your weapon leaves your hand.
*[Resounding blow]* stacks with the *[thundering]* weapon
property.



## Rest Eternal


**School** necromancy; **Level** cleric 4, druid 5, witch 5

**Casting Time** 1 round

**Components** V, S, M/DF (ashes and a vial of holy or unholy
  water)

**Range** touch

**Target** one dead creature touched

**Duration** permanent

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You place a curse upon a dead creature that bars its spirit from
returning. Anyone casting a spell that would communicate with the
dead creature, return it to life, or turn it into an undead
creature must succeed on a caster level check with a DC of 11
plus your caster level.  *[Rest eternal]* cannot be dispelled,
but it can be negated with *[remove curse]* or *[break
enchantment]*.



## Restful Sleep


**School** necromancy; **Level** bard 1

**Casting Time** 10 minutes

**Components** V, S, M (a pinch of sand)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature/level, no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

**Duration** 8 hours or 24 hours; see text

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You cast this spell immediately prior to resting. While under the
effects of this spell, you and your allies enjoy a restful
night's sleep. If a subject completes a full night's rest, it
regains hit points as if it had undergone a full day of bed rest
(regaining twice its character level in hit points). If a subject
completes a full day's rest, it regains three times its character
level in hit points. Any significant interruption during the rest
(such as being awoken) prevents any healing that night and ends
the effect of this spell on the awakened subject. Any healing
acquired while under the effects of *[restful sleep]* is
considered natural healing, and has no affect on effects
requiring magical healing to cure.



## Resurgent Transformation


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** alchemist 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a pinch of meteoric iron worth 100 gp)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 hour/level or until triggered, then 1 round/level

*[Resurgent transformation]* grants you the ability to recover
from deadly wounds with restored vitality and a will to fight,
but at a price. Once cast, *[resurgent transformation]* lies
dormant for up to 1 hour per level until you are reduced to
one-quarter hit points or less.  Once triggered, you immediately
gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Constitution and Strength, damage
reduction 5/—, and the benefits of a *[haste]* spell. In
addition, you heal 4d8 points of damage + 1 point per caster
level (maximum +25).  *[Resurgent transformation]* can even save
you from death by healing the damage from an otherwise mortal
wound, though it does not prevent death from massive damage or
from causes other than hit point loss. Your mental faculties are
impaired by this magical transformation, however, causing 1d4
points of Intelligence and Wisdom damage.

The advantages from your transformation persist for 1 round per
caster level after the spell is triggered. Once the spell ends,
it takes a heavy toll, leaving you exhausted and inflicting 1d4
points of Constitution damage. Utilizing more than one
*[resurgent transformation]* in a day is particularly risky. The
expiration of a second *[resurgent transformation]* in a 24-hour
period inflicts an additional 1d4 points of Constitution damage
and results in death from system shock unless you succeed at a DC
15 Fortitude save, made after the Constitution damage has been
applied.

If the spell expires or is dispelled before the *transformation*
has been triggered, no adverse effects result.



## Retribution


**School** necromancy [evil]; **Level** inquisitor 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature who has just struck you with an attack

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

*[Retribution]* blasts those who have the temerity to assault
your person. You may target anyone who has just struck you with
an attack within the previous round, whether with a melee,
ranged, or natural weapon, or a spell that requires an attack
roll. The target is wracked with shooting pains that impose a -4
penalty on attack rolls, skills checks, and ability checks. On a
successful Fortitude save, the penalty only lasts for 1 round. A
target who worships the same god as you takes a -2 penalty on its
saving throw.



## Reviving Finale


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** bard 3

**Casting Time** 1 swift action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 20 ft.

**Area** a 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Will half (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes
(harmless)

You must have a bardic performance in effect to cast this
spell. With a flourish, you immediately end your bardic
performance, and allies within the area of the spell regain 2d6
hit points. This spell has no effect on undead creatures.



## Righteous Vigor


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
inquisitor 3, paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

Infusing the target with a surge of furious divine energy, you
enhance a creature's ability to hit an opponent based on the
number of times it has already hit that opponent with a
successful attack. Each time the subject successfully strikes an
opponent with a successful melee attack, the subject gains a
cumulative +1 morale bonus on attack rolls (maximum +4 bonus) and
gains 1d8 temporary hit points (to a maximum of 20 temporary hit
points). If an attack misses, the attack bonus resets to +0 but
any accumulated temporary hit points remain. The temporary hit
points disappear at the end of the spell's duration.



## River of Wind


**School** evocation [air]; **Level** druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 120 ft.

**Area** 120-ft. line

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

Summoning up the power of the tempest, you direct a current of
forceful winds where you please. This spell creates a
5-foot-diameter line of wind—the direction of the wind is away
from your location when you cast the spell, and remains constant
in that direction for the spell duration. Creatures caught in a
*[river of wind]* take 4d6 nonlethal damage and are knocked
prone. A successful Fortitude save halves the damage and prevents
being knocked prone.

A creature that begins its turn wholly or partially within a
*[river of wind]* must make a Fortitude save or be pushed 20 feet
in the wind's direction of flow, take 2d6 nonlethal damage, and
be knocked prone—a successful Fortitude save means the creature
merely takes 1d6 nonlethal damage. Creatures under the effect of
*[freedom of movement]* and creatures with the air subtype are
unaffected by a *[river of wind]*.



## Sacred Bond


**School** conjuration (healing); **Level** cleric 3, inquisitor
2, paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 round

**Components** V, S, F (a pair of golden bracelets worth 100 gp
each worn by both you and the target)

**Range** touch; see text

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 10 minutes/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

To use this spell, you first touch the intended recipient,
creating a sympathetic field of healing energies between
you. Once the spell has been cast, you and the target may cast
conjuration (healing) spells with a range of touch upon each
other so long as you are within close range (25 ft. + 5 ft./2
levels). Should either you or the target remove your bracelet,
the spell immediately ends.



## Sacrificial Oath


**School** abjuration; **Level** paladin 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You create a powerful bond between yourself and a single
creature. Until the end of the spell's duration, each time the
target is hit with an attack or fails a saving throw, you can
take the full damage of that attack and any other effects that
creature suffers. If you choose not to take on the damage and
effects, you instead take a number of points of damage equal to
your Constitution score as backlash. Any resistances or
immunities you have are applied normally, but you cannot
otherwise reduce or negate the damage or effects of either the
transfer or the backlash. If you or the subject of the spell move
out of line of sight, the spell ends.



## Saddle Surge


**School** transmutation; **Level** paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Targets** you and your mount

**Duration** 1 round/level (D); see text

You and your mount form a perfect synergy that endows both of you
with advantages based upon how far you travel each round. For
every 5 feet your mount moves in a given round, you gain a +1
competence bonus on [Ride] checks and both you and your mount
gain a +1 morale bonus on damage rolls made with weapons or
natural attacks for 1 round. For instance, if your mount traveled
40 feet in a round, you would gain a +8 bonus on [Ride] checks
and you and your mount would both gain a +8 bonus on damage rolls
for 1 round, to a maximum bonus equal to your caster level. You
must be mounted to enjoy the benefits of this spell. If you
dismount, get knocked off, or take any other action that
separates you from your mount, the spell immediately ends.



## Sanctify Armor


**School** abjuration [good]; **Level** inquisitor 4, paladin 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** touch

**Target** armor touched

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless, object); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless, object)

You imbue your armor with a righteous aura. It gains a +1
enhancement bonus per four caster levels (maximum +5 at 20th
level). When using your judgment or smite ability, you gain DR
5/evil.

An outfit of regular clothing counts as armor that grants no AC
bonus for the purpose of this spell.



## Saving Finale


**School** evocation [mind-affecting]; **Level** bard 1

**Casting Time** 1 immediate action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes
(harmless)

You must have a bardic performance in effect to cast this
spell. With a flourish, you can immediately end your bardic
performance when a creature within range affected by your bardic
performance fails a saving throw, allowing the subject to
immediately reroll the failed saving throw.



## Scent Trail


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a queen ant)

**Range**close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets**one creature/level, no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

**Duration** 1 hour/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You, or a willing creature you touch, lay down a trail of scents
that only the creatures you designate at the time of casting can
detect.  These creatures find it very easy to follow this
trail. They gain a +20 competence bonus on any [Survival] checks
made for the purpose of tracking the creature laying this trail.
Subject creatures with the scent special ability gain a +10
competence bonus on Wisdom or [Survival] checks to follow the
trail.

In addition, you can leave scent messages along the trail. Each
word or emotion in this message requires spending a move action
in the same spot. Subject creatures seeking to understand this
message must make another DC 20 [Survival] check, with a -1
penalty for every word or emotion in the message, in order to
understand it. Creatures cannot benefit from this smell if they
cannot use, or do not have, a sense of smell. Creatures can use
this spell to backtrack through a dungeon, maze, or similar areas
even if the creature laying down the trail crossed over the spot
multiple times.



## Screech


**School** evocation [sonic]; **Level** witch 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Range** 30 ft.

**Area** 30-ft.-radius spread centered on you

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You emit a shrill, piercing shriek, startling those around you
into dropping their guard. Enemies in the area must make a
successful saving throw or immediately provoke attacks of
opportunity from foes that threaten them. You and your allies are
unaffected by your own *[screech]*.



## Sculpt Corpse


**School** necromancy; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (lump of wax)

**Range** touch

**Target** one dead creature touched

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will partial; see text; **Spell Resistance** no

With a clammy caress and a word to the powers lurking beyond
death, you can reshape a dead body look like another creature or
even a specific person so long as you have first-hand knowledge
of how that creature or person actually looks. You can make the
corpse one size larger or smaller and change anything else about
it including its apparent type, gender, or age. Creatures with a
reason to suspect deception may make a Will saving throw to
realize that the corpse was altered. If you chose to make the
corpse look like a specific individual anyone who knows that
individual can make a Will save to realize that the corpse is not
actually that person. However, if a creature fails its Will save
by 5 or less they believe the corpse is that of someone who
closely resembled the person they knew rather than a deliberate
fake. This spell merely changes the appearance of the corpse. Any
spell or effect that targets the corpse (such as *[speak with
dead]* or *[raise dead]*) treats it as if it still had its
original appearance.



## Seamantle


**School** conjuration (creation) [water]; **Level** druid 8,
sorcerer/wizard 8

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a cup of water)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

You sheathe yourself within a churning column of pure elemental
water up to 30 feet high that fills your space. You gain a swim
speed equal to your land speed and can see, hear, and breathe
normally within the *[seamantle]*, but attacks against you are
treated as if you were under the surface of the water. You gain
improved cover (+8 cover bonus to AC, +4 bonus on Reflex saves)
against foes that do not have *[freedom of movement]*
effects. The cover granted by the *[seamantle]* does not enable
you to make [Stealth] checks or prevent attacks of
opportunity. Magical attacks against you are unaffected unless
they require attack rolls or state that they do not function
underwater (such as *[cloudkill]*).

The *[seamantle]* blocks line of effect for any fire spell or
supernatural fire effect, but enemies can attempt to use fire
spells within the *[seamantle]*; this requires a caster level
check (DC 20 + spell level), and if successful the fire spell
takes effect as a bubble of steam contained within the
*[seamantle]* rather than its usual effect.

The *[seamantle]* allows you to make a slam attack by forming a
pseudopod of water, inflicting damage appropriate for your
size. This slam attack has a reach of 30 feet. In addition, as a
standard action, you can attempt to extinguish fires by
touch. You automatically extinguish up to a 10-foot cube of
normal fire. Against magical fire effects, your touch acts as
*[dispel magic]*; this also applies to any non-instantaneous fire
affect that comes into contact with you (such as *[flame blade]*,
*[flaming sphere]*, or *[incendiary cloud]*). Even if you fail to
extinguish a fire, you are not harmed by it. A *[flaming]* or
*[flaming burst]* weapon that strikes you has its power
suppressed for 1d4 rounds if the wielder fails a Fortitude save.



## Seek Thoughts


**School** divination [mind-affecting]; **Level** alchemist 3,
bard 3, inquisitor 3, sorcerer/wizard 3, summoner 3, witch 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a handful of copper coins)

**Range** 40 ft.

**Area** 40-ft.-radius emanation centered on you

**Duration** concentration, up to 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** no

Similar to *[detect thoughts]*, *[seek thoughts]* allows you to
sift through the surface thoughts of those around you. You may
scan for either the answer to a simple question (such as “Where
is the hidden lair of the wererats?”) or for information on a
general topic (such as the beliefs of an evil cult). You detect
the number of creatures who are thinking about this question or
topic within range, as well as their location if they are visible
to you. *[Seek thoughts]* does not let you read actual surface
thoughts, only if a given creature is thinking about the topic
you are concentrating on. A successful Will save prevents you
from sensing a creature's thoughts for the duration of the spell.

You can maintain concentration on *[seek thoughts]*while you
engage in normal conversation, allowing you to ask leading
questions about topics of interest. A creature conversing with
you while you concentrate can notice that you are distracted with
a successful DC 25 [Sense Motive] check.



## Shadow Projection


**School**necromancy [evil]; **Level**sorcerer/wizard 4

**Casting Time**1 minute

**Component**S

**Range**personal

**Target**you

**Duration**1 hour/level (D)

With this spell, you infuse your life force and psyche into your
shadow, giving it independent life and movement as if it were an
undead shadow (see *PF RPG Bestiary*245). Your physical
body lies comatose while you are projecting your shadow, and your
body has no shadow or reflection while the spell is in effect.

While projecting your shadow, you gain a shadow's darkvision,
defensive abilities, fly speed, racial stealth modifier, and
strength damage attack. You do not gain the creature's *create
spawn*ability, nor its skill ranks or Hit Dice. Your shadow has
Hit Dice and hit points equal to your own. Your *[shadow
projection]* has the undead type and may be turned or affected as
undead.

If your *[shadow projection]* is slain, you return to your
physical body and are immediately reduced to -1 hit points. Your
condition becomes dying, and you must begin making Constitution
checks to stabilize.



## Shared Wrath


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
inquisitor 4

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets** up to one creature/level, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

This spell functions as *[wrath]*, except that you grant multiple
creatures the bonuses against your designated foe. All subjects
of *[shared wrath]* receive their bonuses against the same
creature.



## Share Language


**School** divination; **Level** bard 1, cleric 2, druid 2,
sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a page from a dictionary)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 24 hours

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

You can share your facility for one particular language with
another creature. For 24 hours the target can read, understand,
and communicate to the best of its ability in any one language
which you already know.  For every 5 levels you possess, you can
grant the use of another language you know, to a maximum of 5
languages at 20th level. The target must have the physical
capacity to articulate sounds, make gestures, or engage in
whatever other method speakers of the language use to communicate
with each other in order to actually converse. If the target
lacks the mental capacity to grasp an actual language it still
gains enough knowledge to respond to and carry out even extremely
complex commands or suggestions coached in the language (whether
written or spoken). However, since this spell does not endow the
target with greater reasoning capacity, merely a temporarily
enhanced vocabulary, the person offering up instructions to
non-sentient creatures must take care to remove any ambiguity or
guesswork.

Similarly, this spell does not affect the basic nature of the
target, or its disposition toward you or anyone else, so
convincing it to actually carry out these instructions could
require negotiation, threats, or outright bribery.



## Share Senses


**School** divination (scrying); **Level** sorcerer/wizard 4,
  witch 3

**Casting Time** 1 full round

**Components** V, S, M (a hair, scale, or feather from your
  familiar)

**Range** long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Target** your familiar

**Duration** 1 minute/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

Spending a moment in meditation and conjuring an image of the
creature to mind, you reshape your link with your familiar,
causing it to functions like a scrying sensor. Upon casting this
spell you can hear, see, or smell (any one, your choice) what
your familiar is experiencing.  You gain the benefits of any
nonmagical special abilities your familiar has tied to the chosen
sense (such as low-light vision or scent), but use your own
[Perception] skill. You don't need line of sight or line of
effect to your familiar, but you must have an active empathic
link. You may change the sense you are sharing as a standard
action. Unlike other scrying spells, share senses does not allow
magically or supernaturally enhanced senses to work through it,
and you are unable to see in magical or natural darkness unless
your familiar possesses the ability to see in such conditions.

The sensory link with your familiar can be detected as though it
were a scrying sensor.



## Shifting Sand


**School** transmutation [earth]; **Level** druid 3,
  sorcerer/wizard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a handful of sand)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Area** 20-ft. spread

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Reflex negates; see text; **Spell Resistance**
  no

You cause an earthen or sandy surface to shift and churn within
the area. The *[shifting sand]* obliterates tracks and is
considered difficult terrain.  [Acrobatics] checks in the area
take a penalty equal to your caster level (maximum
+10). Creatures entering or beginning their turn in the
*[shifting sand]* must make a Reflex save each round or become
entangled until the beginning of their next turn. If they attempt
to move while entangled, they must make a second Reflex save or
fall prone.  Creatures with the stability racial trait (like
dwarves) may apply it as a bonus on their saving throws.

As a move action, you may move the area of shifting sand up to 10
feet in any direction. Creatures that are entangled or prone in
the spell's area are carried along with the *[shifting sand]* in
the same direction if possible. This movement does not provoke
attacks of opportunity. Unattended Medium or smaller objects may
also be carried along or shallowly buried by the *[shifting
sand]*.



## Sift


**School** divination; **Level** bard 0, inquisitor 0

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 30 ft.

**Area** one 10-ft. cube

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You examine an area at range as if you were searching for fine
details with the [Perception] skill.  Make a [Perception] check
with a -5 penalty, modified as normal for conditions. No penalty
is applied for distance. Apply the result against the DC for any
hidden features, such as secret doors, traps, or hidden
treasure. You must be able to see the area you are attempting to
search, and you only find details that can be perceived with
sight or touch. *[Sift]* detects only objects and features, not
actual creatures.



## Sirocco


**School** evocation [air, fire]; **Level** druid 6,
  sorcerer/wizard 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (handful of fine sand cast into the
  air)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Area** cylinder (20-ft. radius, 60 ft. high)

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial, see text; **Spell
  Resistance** yes

A blast of furnace-hot wind blasts downward, inflicting 4d6 fire
damage +1 point per caster level to all creatures in the area and
knocking them prone. A successful Fortitude save halves the fire
damage and negates being knocked prone. Flying creatures forced
into the ground by the powerful downdraft take damage as if they
fell unless they make a DC 15 [Fly] check, in which case they
remain at their original altitude. Any creature that takes damage
from a sirocco becomes fatigued (or exhausted, if already
fatigued, such as from a previous round of exposure to a
*[sirocco]. Creatures with the water subtype take a -4 penalty on
all saving throws against this spell and take double normal
damage.



## Sleepwalk


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
inquisitor 4, witch 4

**Casting Time** 1 round

**Components** V, S, M (a sprig of belladonna worth 100 gp)

**Range** touch

**Target** unconscious creature touched

**Duration** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Will negates; see text; **Spell Resistance** yes

You compel an unconscious or sleeping creature to rise and move
in a half-awake state. The target creature staggers about if led
or guided, but remains helpless for all other purposes. The
subject moves at half speed and is limited to a single move
action each round. It is not capable of moving at a higher rate
of speed or taking actions other than movement except by magical
assistance, and automatically fails any Dexterity- or
Strength-based skill checks. If the creature takes any damage
while *sleepwalking* it must make a new saving throw or the spell
ends and the creature awakes (if it has more than 0 hit
points). When the spell ends or is dismissed, the target remains
unconscious and must be awoken normally. While *[sleepwalk]*
allows an unconscious creature to move, it does not awaken the
creature, nor does it stabilize or otherwise heal them. A
disabled creature that moves about while under the effects of
this spell does not start dying again as a result of this
movement.



## Slipstream


**School** conjuration (creation) [water]; **Level** druid 2,
ranger 2, sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a few drops of oil and water)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 10 minutes/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Reflex negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
  no

You create a low-cresting wave of water that carries the target
along the surface of water or the ground. When moving across
level ground, the target's speed increases by 10 feet. If going
downhill, speed increases by 20 feet instead, but *[slipstream]*
provides no movement bonus when going uphill. While swimming, the
*[slipstream]* increases the target's swim speed by 20 feet—if
the target does not have a swim speed, this spell grants a swim
speed of 20 ft.



## Snake Staff


**School** transmutation; **Level** cleric 5, druid 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a knife suitable for whittling)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** 1 or more pieces of wood, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (object); **Spell Resistance** yes
(object)

With a long hissing whisper, you transform ordinary pieces of
wood into various sorts of snakes that immediately attack your
foes. As long as the snakes remain within sight, you can direct
their actions telepathically as a free action. You can only apply
this spell to wooden objects not in a creature's possession or
not part of a larger structure or plant. Each time you cast this
spell you can create a number of snakes equal to your caster
level. More powerful snakes take up more than one of your
available total, as noted below. See [Snake statistics] and
advanced and giant [simple templates].

*Venomous Snake*: A stick or piece of firewood. Counts as 1
 snake.

*Constrictor Snake*: A staff or tree branch. Counts as 2 snakes.

*Advanced Venomous Snake*: A stick or piece of firewood. Counts
as 2 snakes.

*Advanced Constrictor Snake*: A staff or tree branch. Counts as 3
snakes.

*Advanced Giant Venomous Snake*: A log or pile of debris. Counts
as 4 snakes.

*Advanced Giant Constrictor Snake*: A fallen tree or a large pile
of debris. Counts as 5 snakes.



## Solid Note


**School** conjuration (creation); **Level** bard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect** one solidified musical note

**Duration** concentration + 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You give temporary physical form to a single musical note and can
hang it, suspended, wherever you wish within range, allowing you
to use it as hook, pulley, door blocker, or anything else your
imagination desires.  The exact appearance of the *[solid note]*
depends on your melody. You can make it spiked or smooth, simple
or convoluted, and with any color pattern you wish, however, it
always has a size approximately equal to that of your
outstretched hand. Once created, the *[solid note]* resists all
attempts to move it but instantly disappears if enough force or
weight is brought to bear against it. The note has an effective
Strength equal to 10 + your caster level. It cannot hold more
weight than the equivalent of a heavy load for its Strength
without disappearing. Any creature that wins an opposed Strength
check against the note (by pushing open a door which the note is
holding shut for example) also causes it to disappear. The note
can never deal actual harm to a creature and disappears if
successfully attacked (AC 10 + your Charisma modifier) or
overcome with a combat maneuver such as bull rush (CMD 2 + your
base attack bonus + your Charisma modifier). Any creature
obstructed by the *[solid note]* simply fails to budge it and
loses that action for the round.



## Spark


**School** evocation [fire]; **Level** bard 0, cleric 0, druid 0,
sorcerer/wizard 0, witch 0

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V or S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one Fine object

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (object); **Spell Resistance**
yes (object)

You can make an unattended Fine flammable object catch on
fire. This works as if you were using flint and steel except that
you can use *[spark]* in any sort of weather and it takes much
less time to actually ignite an object.



## Spiked Pit


**School** conjuration (creation); **Level** sorcerer/wizard 3,
summoner 3

This spell functions as *[create pit]*, except that the pit is
lined with wickedly sharp spikes along its bottom and walls and
has a maximum depth of 50 feet. Creatures who fall into the pit
take falling damage as normal, plus 2d6 points of piercing damage
from the spikes. Any creature or object coming into contact with
the spikes along the walls, such as a creature trying to climb
out, or rope or other typical aids to climbing, takes 1d6 points
of piercing damage each round they are in contact with the
walls. For those willing to accept the damage incurred while
climbing, the pit's walls have a [Climb] DC of 20.



## Spiritual Ally


**School** evocation [force]; **Level** cleric 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect** spiritual ally of force

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

An ally made of pure force appears in a single 5-foot square
within range. The ally takes the form of a servant of your
god. The *[spiritual ally]* occupies its space, though you and
your allies can move through it, since it is your ally. The
*[spiritual ally]* carries a single weapon, one favored by your
deity (as for *[spiritual weapon]*), which has the same threat
range and critical modifiers as a real weapon of its form. Each
round on your turn, starting with the turn that you cast this
spell, your *[spiritual ally]* can make an attack against a foe
within its reach that you designate. The *[spiritual ally]*
threatens adjacent squares and can flank and make attacks of
opportunity as if it were a normal creature. The *[spiritual
ally]* uses your base attack bonus (gaining extra attacks if your
base attack bonus is high enough) plus your Wisdom bonus when it
makes a melee attack. When the *[spiritual ally]* hits, it deals
1d10 points of force damage + 1 point of damage per 3 caster
levels (maximum +5 at 15th level). It strikes as a spell, not a
weapon, so it bypasses DR and can affect incorporeal creatures.

Each round after the first, you can move the *[spiritual ally]*
as a swift action. It has a speed of 30 feet, and a fly speed of
30 feet (perfect maneuverability). Being a construct of force,
the *[spiritual ally]* cannot be harmed by any physical attacks,
but *[dispel magic]*, *[disintegrate]*, a *sphere of
annihilation*, or a *[rod of cancellation]* affects it. A
*[spiritual ally]*'s AC against touch attacks is 10.

If an attacked creature has spell resistance, you make a caster
level check (1d20 + caster level) against that spell resistance
the first time the *[spiritual ally]* strikes it. If the ally is
successfully resisted, the spell is dispelled. If not, the weapon
has its normal full effect on that creature for the duration of
the spell.



## Spite


**School** abjuration; **Level** witch 4

**Casting Time** 1 round

**Components** V, S, M (rare inks worth 250 gp)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 hour/level (D) or until discharged

Choose a single touch range spell of 4th level or lower with a
casting time of 1 standard action or less. As part of the action
of casting *[spite]*, you cast the associated spell and bind it
into a defensive ward in the form of a tattoo, birthmark, or wart
somewhere upon your body. The next time you are hit by a melee
attack or a combat maneuver is used successfully against you, the
stored spell is triggered against your foe. You do not need to
succeed on a touch attack to affect the target, but in all other
respects the spell is treated as though you had cast it
normally. If the attacking creature is not a valid target for the
spell, the stored spell is lost with no effect.

You can have only one *[spite]* spell in effect at a time; if you
cast this spell a second time, the previous spell effect ends.



## Stay the Hand


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
paladin 4

**Casting Time** 1 immediate action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round/level and special; see text

**Saving Throw**Will partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

You cause a creature's arm to waver and prevent it from striking
another creature. You can cast this spell when the target is
about to make a melee attack against another creature. On a
failed saving throw, the target does not follow through with its
attack, and its entire action is wasted for the round. On a
successful saving throw, the target can make its attack, forcing
its strike though the compulsion but losing both accuracy and
power, taking a -5 penalty on its attack and damage rolls.
Whether or not the target makes its initial save or not, it is
subject to a -2 penalty on attack and damage rolls against the
creature it originally targeted for the duration of the spell.



## Stone Call


**School** conjuration (creation) [earth]; **Level** druid 2,
ranger 2, sorcerer/wizard 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Area**cylinder (40-ft. radius, 20 ft. high)

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**none; **Spell Resistance** no

A rain of dirt, gravel, and small pebbles fills the area, dealing
2d6 points of bludgeoning damage to every creature in the
area. This damage only occurs once, when the spell is cast. For
the remaining duration of the spell, this debris covers the
ground, making the entire area difficult terrain. At the end of
the duration, the rocks disappear, leaving no aftereffects (other
than the damage dealt).



## Stone Fist


**School** transmutation [earth]; **Level** alchemist 1, druid 1,
sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a chip of granite)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level (D)

This spell transforms your hands into living stone. While this
spell is in effect, your unarmed strikes do not provoke attacks
of opportunity and deal 1d6 points of lethal bludgeoning damage
(1d4 if you are Small).  In addition, your unarmed strikes ignore
the hardness of any object with a hardness less than 8.

*[Stone to flesh]* immediately dispels *[stone fist]*. Should you
be the target of *[transmute rock to mud]*, this spell
immediately ends and you take 4d6 points of damage.



## Stormbolts


**School** evocation [electricity]; **Level** cleric 8, druid 8,
sorcerer/wizard 8, witch 8

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a copper rod)

**Range** 30 ft.

**Area** a 30-ft.-radius spread, centered on you

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

When you cast this spell, lightning spills forth from your body
in all directions. The bolts do not harm natural vegetation or
creatures in the area you wish to exclude from damage. Any other
creatures within the area take 1d8 points of electricity damage
per caster level (maximum 20d8) and are stunned for 1 round. A
successful saving throw halves the damage and negates the stun
effect.



## Strong Jaw


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 4, ranger 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

Laying a hand upon an allied creature's jaw, claws, tentacles, or
other natural weapons, you enhance the power of that creature's
natural attacks. Each natural attack that creature makes deals
damage as if the creature were two sizes larger than it actually
is. If the creature is already Gargantuan or Colossal-sized,
double the amount of damage dealt by each of its natural attacks
instead. This spell does not actually change the creature's size;
all of its statistics except the amount of damage dealt by its
natural attacks remain unchanged.



## Stumble Gap


**School** conjuration (creation); **Level** sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, F (miniature shovel costing 10 gp)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect** see text

**Duration** 1 round + 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** Reflex partial; **Spell Resistance** no

You create a shallow extradimensional hole perfectly sized to
trip anyone who steps within it. This hole occupies a single
5-foot square with a depth of six inches. Any creature occupying
the square when you first create the hole, or who later steps
into the square containing the hole, must make a Reflex saving
throw to avoid falling prone in an adjacent square and taking 1d6
points of damage. A creature that makes its saving throw still
stumbles ever so slightly and takes a -1 penalty on all rolls and
checks for 1 round. The spell has no effect on creatures adjacent
to the square containing the hole.



## Stunning Finale


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
  bard 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets** up to 3 creatures, no two of which can be more than
30 ft.  apart

**Duration** 1 round

**Saving Throw**Fortitude partial; see text; **Spell Resistance**
  yes

You must have a bardic performance in effect to cast this
spell. With a flourish, you immediately end your bardic
performance, assaulting the senses of the targets with your
finale. Each target is stunned for 1 round. On a successful
saving throw, a target is staggered for 1 round.



## Suffocation

**School** necromancy; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 5, witch 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a vial containing a bit of the caster's
  breath)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** 3 rounds

**Saving Throw** Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

This spell extracts the air from the target's lungs, causing
swift suffocation. The target can attempt to resist this spell's
effects with a Fortitude save—if he succeeds, he is merely
staggered for 1 round as he gasps for breath. If the target
fails, he immediately begins to suffocate. On the target's next
turn, he falls unconscious and is reduced to 0 hit points. One
round later, the target drops to -1 hit points and is dying. One
round after that, the target dies. Each round, the target can
delay that round's effects from occurring by making a successful
Fortitude save, but the spell effect continues for 3 rounds, and
each time a target fails his Fortitude save, he moves one step
further along the track to suffocation. This spell only affects
living creatures that must breathe. It is impossible to defeat
the effects of this spell by simply holding one's breath—if the
victim fails the initial saving throw, the air in his lungs is extracted.

## Suffocation, Mass

**School** necromancy; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 9, witch 9

**Target** one living creature/2 levels (no two of which may be
more than 30 feet apart)

**Duration** 1 round/level

This spell functions as suffocation except as noted above. Note
that the duration of this spell is much longer, forcing those
suffering from the effect to make far more Fortitude saves to
stave off eventual suffocation.



## Summon Eidolon


**School** conjuration (summoning); **Level** summoner 2

**Casting Time** 1 round

**Components** V, S, M (a silver coin)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one eidolon

**Duration** 1 minute/level (D)

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You open a rift between dimensions that summons your
eidolon. Treat this as if you had summoned your eidolon normally,
except that it only remains with you for the duration of this
spell. While summoned in this way, your eidolon cannot touch any
creature warded by *[protection from evil]* or a similar effect
and your eidolon can be sent back to its home plane by *[dispel
magic]*.

If you cast this spell while your eidolon is already on your
plane, this spell has no effect. This spell allows you to summon
your eidolon even if it has been returned to its home plane due
to damage.



## Swarm Skin


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 6, witch 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a crushed insect hive)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration**see text

You convert all of your soft tissue into swarms of insects or
other creatures and send them off to do your bidding, leaving
nothing but your bones and gear behind. These swarms have all
their normal qualities and abilities but also bear a tiny portion
of your consciousness that allows you to perceive what they do
and to control their actions. While in this form, you cannot use
any of your own abilities or take any actions other than
controlling the swarms.

Each time you cast this spell you get a total allotment of levels
equal to your caster level and any swarm you choose to create
costs one or more of those levels. You can “spend” your allotment
of levels to create any combination of swarms so long as their
total does not exceed your caster level.

  Number of Levels   Swarm Type(s)
  ------------------ ---------------------------------
  2 caster levels    [Spider swarm]
  4 caster levels    [Rat swarm]
  6 caster levels    [Crab swarm], [wasp swarm]
  8 caster levels    [Centipede swarm], [leech swarm]
  10 caster levels   [Army ant swarm]

Once you create these swarms they remain in existence until
destroyed or you order them to return to your body. When all
swarms have returned to your body or are destroyed, your flesh
wraps itself back around your bones and you regain the ability to
act normally. If your bones are not where you left them you must
first locate them in order to regain access to your body. You
always know if your bones are destroyed and your consciousness
remains in control of the swarms until they too are destroyed
(and your die). If you can use the swarms to get help and arrange
for someone to repair your bones (using anything that would
normally restore you to life), at which point you can return the
swarms to your body.



## Thorn Body


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 3, druid 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level

This spell causes spines to grow from your exposed skin, damaging
creatures that strike you. Any creature striking you with a melee
weapon, an unarmed strike, or a natural weapon takes 1d6 points
of piercing damage +1 point per caster level (maximum
+15). Creatures using melee weapons with reach are unaffected by
this spell. Creatures that successfully grapple you take 2d6
points of piercing damage +1 point per caster level (maximum
+15). In addition, your natural attacks and unarmed strikes deal
an additional 1d6 points of piercing damage.

Thorns created by this spell persist through any new physical
shape or form you assume, such as via wildshape or any polymorph
effect.



## Threefold Aspect


**School** transmutation; **Level** druid 5, witch 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S, F (silver crescent worth 5 gp)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 24 hours (D)

*[Threefold aspect]* allows you to shift your appearance between
your natural age and three idealized age categories: young adult
(youth/maiden), adulthood (father/mother), or elderly
(elder/crone). In each case, your appearance is your own at the
appropriate age, rather than that of a new individual.

You may change between these three aspects or your actual age as
a standard action. As the young adult, you gain a +2 enhancement
bonus to Dexterity and Constitution, but suffer a -2 penalty to
Wisdom. In the adult aspect, you gain a +2 enhancement bonus to
Wisdom and Intelligence, but take a -2 penalty to Dexterity. As
the elderly aspect, you gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Wisdom and
Intelligence, but take a -2 penalty to Strength and Dexterity. As
enhancement bonuses, these stack with any bonuses or penalties
you may have from your actual age (which are untyped bonuses)—the
bonuses granted by this spell represent your idealized form in
this threefold aspect rather than simply duplicating your ability
scores at any one particular age.

*[True seeing]* reveals your natural appearance overlaid with
that your aspect, recognizing both as part of your true
self. Individuals who study you closely and have interacted with
you at another apparent age recognize a resemblance (as though
family) with a successful DC 20 [Perception] check.

*[Threefold aspect]*does not alter your clothing or equipment,
and does not heal any deformity or injury unrelated to age.



## Thundering Drums


**School** evocation [sonic]; **Level** bard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 15 ft.

**Area**cone-shaped burst

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

You strike the ground in front of you, filling the area in front
of you with the thunder of pounding drums. Any creature in the
area takes 1d8 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum
5d8) and is knocked prone. A successful Fortitude save halves the
damage and negates being knocked prone.



## Timely Inspiration


**School** divination; **Level** bard 1

**Casting Time** 1 immediate action

**Components** V

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** yes
(harmless)

A word of arcane-empowered inspiration can snatch victory from
seeming defeat. Cast this spell when a creature fails an attack
roll or skill check. The target gains a +1 competence bonus per
five caster levels (maximum +3 bonus) on the attack roll or skill
check retroactively. If the bonus is enough to make the failure a
success, the roll succeeds.



## Tireless Pursuers


**School** transmutation; **Level** inquisitor 4, ranger 3

**Components** V, S, M (a hard biscuit broken into pieces)

**Range** touch

**Target** you plus one touched creature/3 levels

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

This spell functions as *[tireless pursuit]*, except as noted
above.



## Tireless Pursuit


**School** transmutation; **Level** inquisitor 1, ranger 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a hard biscuit)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 hour/level (D)

You harden your body against the stresses of long travel. You
halve the damage caused by hustling and forced marching (see
*PF RPG Core Rulebook* 171). In addition, for the
duration of the spell you ignore any fatigue caused by such
travel. Once the spell ends, if you still have any nonlethal
damage caused by the hustling or forced march, you become
fatigued, or exhausted if already fatigued.



## Touch of Gracelessness


**School** transmutation; **Level** bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Fortitude partial; **Spell Resistance** yes

With a single touch, you reduce a creature to a fumbling
clown. The target takes a penalty to its Dexterity equal to 1d6+1
per two caster levels (maximum 1d6+5). This penalty cannot drop
the target's Dexterity score below 1.

In addition, if the subject moves more than half its speed, it
falls prone. If the subject flies, its maneuverability is reduced
by one step (perfect maneuverability becomes good, good becomes
average, and so on).

A successful Fortitude save halves the penalty to Dexterity and
negates the possibility of falling prone or the reduction to fly
maneuverabilities.



## Touch of the Sea


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 1, druid 1,
sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a fish scale)

**Range** touch

**Target** creature touched

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (harmless); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless)

You cause webs to grow between the target's fingers and its feet
to transform into flippers, granting a swim speed of 30 feet
along with the standard +8 bonus on [Swim] checks and the ability
to take 10 even if distracted or endangered. You can also use the
run action while swimming, provided you swim in a straight line.
This transformation causes any boots or gloves the target is
wearing to meld into its form (although magic items with a
continuous effect continue to function). This spell does not
grant the target any ability to breathe water.



## Transmogrify


**School** transmutation; **Level** summoner 4

**Casting Time** 1 hour

**Components** V, S, M (a flask of quicksilver worth 1,000 gp)

**Range** touch

**Target** your eidolon

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** no

Your eidolon's form shifts and transforms. This spell allows you
to change any of the eidolon's evolutions by allocating its
evolution pool on new evolutions. If you have the aspect or
greater aspect ability, this spell also allows you to change the
evolution points spent to modify you, including removing or
adding points as allowed by those abilities.

Your eidolon cannot benefit from this spell more than once per
day. This spell does not allow you to change your eidolon's base
form.



## Transmute Potion to Poison


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round then 1 minute/level; see text

This extract causes you to take on a pale, sickly pallor for 1
round.  During this time, if you consume a potion, it has no
effect. Instead, your mouth fills with a vile poison that you can
spit onto a weapon as a free action. If you do not spit out the
poison in 1 round, it affects you instead. The effect of the
poison depends on the level of spell contained in the potion
consumed (see below). If the poison is not used within 1 minute
per caster level it becomes inert. You can only create one dose
of poison in this way per casting of this spell.

Transmuted Poisons ------------------

The following poisons are created through the *[transmute potion
to poison]* spell. The power of the poison depends on the level
of the spell contained in the transmuted potion.

**0-Level Potion Poison**

**Type** poison, injury; **Save** Fortitude DC 10

**Frequency** 1/round for 2 rounds

**Effect** 1 Dex damage; **Cure** 1 save

**1st-Level Potion Poison**

**Type** poison, injury; **Save** Fortitude DC 11

**Frequency** 1/round for 4 rounds

**Effect** 1d2 Dex damage; **Cure** 1 save

**2nd-Level Potion Poison**

**Type** poison, injury; **Save** Fortitude DC 13

**Frequency** 1/round for 6 rounds

**Effect** 1d4 Str damage; **Cure** 1 save

**3rd-Level Potion Poison**

**Type** poison, injury; **Save** Fortitude DC 14

**Frequency** 1/round for 6 rounds

**Effect** 1d4 Con damage; **Cure** 2 consecutive saves



## Treasure Stitching


**School** transmutation; **Level** bard 4, cleric 5,
  sorcerer/wizard 5

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a piece of embroidered cloth no larger
than 10-ft. square worth 100 gp)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets** all objects on cloth

**Duration** 1 day/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Fortitude negates (object); **Spell Resistance**
yes (object)

You can transform all objects placed on a cloth into an
embroidered, two-dimensional representation, making it easy for
you to store and transport the items. You can pile any amount or
weight of objects on the cloth so long as the pile stays within
the dimensions of the cloth (up to a 10-foot cube). When you cast
the spell the entire pile disappears into the cloth, replaced by
a highly accurate, sewn picture of the pile from whatever angle
you wish. The cloth retains its normal weight and dimensions. You
can restore the pile of objects at any time as a full-round
action by unfurling the cloth and ordering the spell to end,
consuming the cloth. Anyone else wishing to restore the objects
must successfully dispel your spell. If the cloth is destroyed or
significantly damaged, all objects held within the cloth are
lost. This spell cannot affect artifacts or other sorts of
similarly unique objects.



## True Form


**School**abjuration; **Level**druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S

**Range**medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target**up to one creature/3 levels, no two of which can be
more than 30 ft. apart

**Duration**1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance**yes

*[True form]* removes any polymorph effect from a target
creature, returning it to its true form, even against its
will. Against creatures affected by polymorph spell effects (such
as *[baleful polymorph]* or *giant form*), you must make a caster
level check (1d20 + caster level, maximum +15) against a DC of 11
+ caster level of the effect. Success means that the polymorph
effect immediately ends.

A creature with the supernatural ability to change shape (such as
a lycanthrope) must make a Will saving throw or immediately
revert to its true form. If it fails this first saving throw, the
creature can attempt another Will saving throw to overcome the
spell as a full-round action that does not provoke attacks of
opportunity. If this save succeeds, the spell ends and the
creature is capable of changing shape once again. If the second
save fails, the creature is locked in its true form for the
duration of the spell, preventing any further polymorph effects
from changing its shape.



## Tsunami


**School** conjuration (creation) [water]; **Level** druid 9,
sorcerer/wizard 9

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Effect** 10-ft.-deep wave 10 ft. wide/level and 2
  ft. tall/level

**Duration** 5 rounds

**Saving Throw** see text; **Spell Resistance** no

You create a massive wave of water that then moves in a straight
line across water or land—you select the direction the wave
travels (which must be perpendicular to its width), but once set
in motion, the wave cannot change course. Over the surface of
open water, the wave travels at a speed of 60 feet per round—on
land or underwater, the wave travels at a speed of 30 feet per
round.

Creatures struck by a tsunami take 8d6 points of bludgeoning
damage (a Fortitude save halves this damage). In addition, the
tsunami makes a special CMB check against any creature it
strikes—the wave's CMB is equal to your caster level + your
relevant spellcasting ability score modifier (whichever is
highest) + 8 (for the wave's size). If this CMB check defeats a
creature's CMD, the creature is knocked prone and carried along
by the wave. A creature carried along by a tsunami can attempt to
escape the wave on its turn as a standard action by making a CMB
or [Swim] check opposed by the wave's CMB check—if a creature
fails to escape, it takes another 6d6 points of bludgeoning
damage (Fortitude save for half) and continues being carried
along by the wave.

Objects struck by a tsunami are swept up if they are Huge or
smaller and are carried along by the wave, deposited in a pile at
the end of the wave's journey. Gargantuan or larger objects, as
well as structures or objects firmly attached to the ground, take
8d6 points of bludgeoning damage when a tsunami passes through
its space—if this is enough to destroy the object or structure,
the remains are carried along by the wave. Hardness does not
reduce this damage, nor is it halved as damage dealt to objects
normally is. *[Freedom of movement]* prevents a creature from
being carried along by a tsunami but does not prevent damage
caused by it hitting a creature.

A solid barrier that is taller than the tsunami that is not
destroyed by the wave stops that portion of the wave from
continuing onward, leaving a gap in the wave as the rest of it
continues forward.



## Twilight Knife


**School** evocation [force]; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 3, witch
  3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, F (a small knife)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect** floating knife of force

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You create a darkly sinister floating knife that attacks the same
creature as you each round. If you choose not to attack a
creature, or you make an attack that affects multiple opponents,
the knife makes no attack during that round. The knife uses your
base attack bonus modified by either your Intelligence or
Charisma bonus (whichever is higher) when making this
attack. Unless you specifically will it to do otherwise, or it
proves impossible to do so, the knife always maneuvers itself so
that it can flank your opponent before making the attack. The
knife deals 1d4 points of force damage on a successful hit and
has the same threat range and critical multipliers as a normal
dagger. In addition, if the target is denied a Dexterity bonus to
AC or the knife flanks the target, the knife can make sneak
attacks as a rogue, inflicting an extra 1d6 points of force
damage per four caster levels on a successful attack.

A *[twilight knife]* cannot be attacked or harmed by physical
attacks, but *[dispel magic]*, *[disintegrate]*, a *sphere of
annihilation*, or a *[rod of cancellation]* affects it. A
*[twilight knife]*'s AC against touch attacks is 12 (10 + size
bonus for Tiny object) plus your Dexterity modifier.

If an attacked creature has spell resistance, you make a caster
level check (1d20 + caster level) against that spell resistance
the first time the *[twilight knife]* strikes it. If the knife is
successfully resisted, the spell is dispelled. If not, the weapon
has its normal full effect on that creature for the duration of
the spell.



## Twin Form


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a blend of soil and the caster's blood)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 round/level or until discharged (D)

This extract splits a perfect double of yourself from your body,
dressed and equipped exactly as you are. You are able to shift
your consciousness from one body to the other once each round as
a free action. This shift takes place either immediately before
your turn or immediately after it, but not during the round. You
may act normally in the body you inhabit. Your other self is
treated as though dazed, except it may take a single move action
each round during your turn. Your twin cannot speak while you are
in your other body, and cannot flank, make attacks of
opportunity, or otherwise threaten enemies.

Both you and your twin have the same statistics and start with
the number of hit points you had when you ingested the
extract. Once you have split, these hit points are tracked
separately. Any spells, extracts, or magical effects (such as
from potions) that were active when you ingested the extract are
active for both you and your twin. If any such effects expire,
are dispelled, dismissed, or otherwise used or ended, they end
for both of you. Extracts or spells cast after you split affect
you and your twin as though you were two separate targets. Your
equipment is linked between your two selves, and if an item on
one is consumed or destroyed, its duplicate is used up or
destroyed as well.

The body you do not inhabit crumbles into dust when the extract's
duration expires or is dismissed. If the body you inhabit is
destroyed, you immediately shift to your surviving self and the
extract immediately ends. The body you left behind crumbles into
dust, and you are stunned until the start of your next turn. If
the body you do not inhabit is destroyed, the extract also ends
immediately, but you suffer no ill effects.

You have no special ability to sense what your second body is
experiencing, though you immediately know if it has been
destroyed. You may switch between bodies at any distance on the
same plane. If your bodies cross into separate planes (including
through the use of *[teleport]* or *[blink]*), the body you
inhabit survives, while your other body is destroyed.



## Unfetter


**School** transmutation; **Level** summoner 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a broken chain)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** your eidolon

**Duration** 10 minutes/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** no

This spell breaks the life link between you and your
eidolon. This spell allows your eidolon to venture more than 100
feet away from you without penalty. It can travel any distance
while this spell is in effect without penalty, but if the spell
expires while the eidolon is farther than 100 feet away, it
immediately loses hit points as normal for distance and is
possibly sent back to its home plane. While this spell is in
effect, you cannot sacrifice hit points to prevent damage to your
eidolon. Damage that would be transferred due to the life bond
ability is not transferred. If you attempt to use the
transposition ability while this spell is in effect, you must
roll on the *[teleport]* mishap table, using the “studied
carefully” row.



## Universal Formula


**School** transmutation; **Level** alchemist 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (quicksilver and powdered platinum worth
  100 gp)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** instantaneous

As you ingest this extract, it transforms into the appropriate
extract for any formula you know of 3rd level or lower and takes
effect immediately. If the chosen formula has an expensive
material component, it must be provided along with the component
for this formula. You may not create an infused extract with this
formula.



## Unwilling Shield


**School** necromancy; **Level** bard 5, inquisitor 5,
sorcerer/wizard 6, witch 6

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (ruby dust worth 250 gp)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one creature

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

Like *[shield other]*, *[unwilling shield]* creates a mystic
connection between you and the target, but unlike *[shield
other]*, the target shares the wounds that you receive. In
addition, the link draws upon the target's life force to
supplement your own defenses. You gain a +1 luck bonus to AC and
on saving throws. You take only half damage from all wounds and
attacks (including those dealt by special abilities) that deal
hit point damage. The amount of damage not taken by you is taken
by the target. Forms of harm that do not involve hit points, such
as *charm* effects, ability damage, level draining, and death
effects are not affected. If you take a reduction in hit points
from a lowered Constitution score, the reduction is not split
with the target because it is not hit point damage. When the
spell ends, subsequent damage is no longer divided between you
and the subject, but damage already split is not assigned to you.

If you and the target of the spell move out of range of each
other, the spell remains active, but damage is no longer shared
until you are once again within range of each other.



## Unwitting Ally


**School** enchantment (charm) [mind-affecting]; **Level** bard 0

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature

**Duration** 1 round

**Saving Throw**Will negates; **Spell Resistance** yes

You befuddle the target's mind. The target has difficulty telling
friend from foe for a short period of time. The subject is
considered your ally and not your enemies' ally while determining
flanking. The subject takes no other hostile action against your
enemies due to this spell's effect.



## Vanish


**School**illusion (glamer); **Level**bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1

**Casting Time**1 standard action

**Component**V, S

**Range**touch

**Target**creature touched

**Duration**1 round/level (up to 5 rounds) (D)

**Saving Throw**Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**yes
(harmless)

This spell functions like *[invisibility],* except the effect
only lasts for 1 round per caster level (maximum of 5
rounds). Like *[invisibility]*, the spell immediately ends if the
subject attacks any creature.



## Veil of Positive Energy


**School** abjuration [good]; **Level** paladin 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal or 5 ft.; see text

**Target** you or all creatures within 5 ft.; see text

**Duration** 10 minutes/level (D)

You surround yourself with a veil of positive energy, making it
harder for undead creatures to harm you. When under the effect of
this spell, you gain a +2 sacred bonus to AC and a+2 sacred bonus
on saves. Both of these bonuses apply only against attacks or
effects created by undead creatures. You can dismiss this spell
before its normal duration as a swift action on your turn to deal
a number of points of positive energy damage equal to your level
to all undead creatures within 5 feet of you.



## Venomous Bolt


**School** necromancy; **Level** ranger 3

**Casting Time** 1 swift action

**Components** V, S

**Range** 0 ft.

**Target** one arrow or bolt

**Duration** instantaneous

**Saving Throw**Fortitude negates; see text; **Spell Resistance**
  yes

You infuse a single arrow or crossbow bolt with natural venom as
you fire it. In addition to its normal damage, anyone struck by
this arrow or bolt is affected as if by the *[poison]* spell. If
the arrow is not fired immediately, the spell ends with no
effect.



## Versatile Weapon


**School** transmutation; **Level** bard 2, ranger 2,
  sorcerer/wizard 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (iron filings)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one weapon or 50 projectiles, all of which must be
together at the time of casting

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless, object); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless, object)

You transform the physical makeup of a weapon as you desire. This
spell functions like *[greater magic weapon]*, except that it
subtly alters the physical properties of a weapon, enabling it to
bypass damage reduction of one the following types: bludgeoning,
cold iron, piercing, silver, or slashing. The affected weapon
still inflicts damage of its normal type and its hardness and hit
points are unchanged.  This spell can be cast on a natural weapon
or unarmed strike.



## Vomit Swarm


**School** conjuration (summoning); **Level** alchemist 2, witch
  2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** S

**Range** personal

**Effect**one swarm of spiders

**Duration** 1 round/level

You vomit forth a [swarm of spiders] that attacks all other
creatures within its area. The swarm begins adjacent to you, but
if no living creatures are within its area, it moves in one
direction of your choosing at its normal speed. You can move the
swarm or change the swarm's direction by spending a standard
action to concentrate on the swarm, otherwise it continues moving
in its current direction. If your caster level is at least 7th,
you can vomit forth a swarm of wasps instead. Finally, if your
caster level is at least 13th, you can vomit forth a swarm of
army ants.



## Vortex


**School** evocation [water]; **Level** druid 7, sorcerer/wizard
  7

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a stirring spoon)

**Range** long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Effect** whirlpool 50 ft. deep, 30 ft. wide at top, and 5
ft. wide at base

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** Reflex negates, see text; **Spell Resistance**
  yes

You create a powerful and immobile whirlpool in any body of
liquid large enough to contain the spell's effect. Any Large or
smaller creature that comes in contact with the spell effect must
succeed on a Reflex save or take 3d6 points of bludgeoning
damage. A Medium or smaller creature that fails its first save
must succeed on a second one or be pulled into the whirlpool and
held suspended in its powerful currents, taking 1d8 points of
damage each round on your turn with no save allowed. You may
direct the whirlpool to eject any carried creatures whenever you
wish. A boat that is equal in length or shorter than the vortex's
width that passes through a vortex takes 6d6 points of damage and
is caught up by the current. If the boat's captain makes a DC 25
[Profession] (sailor) check (or if the boat is longer than the
vortex's width), the boat takes only half damage and is not
caught up by the vortex.



## Wake of Light


**School** evocation [good]; **Level** paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** 120 ft.

**Effect** a 10-ft.-wide path in a straight line, up to 120
  ft. long

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You and your mount lay down a trail of glowing, heavenly mist
behind you as you move that makes passage easier for good
creatures but more difficult for evil creatures. This glowing
trail of mist appears behind your mount in a straight line
starting where you cast the spell and ending where your mount
ends its movement. The mist takes the form of a path 10 feet wide
and up to 120 feet long and always floats just above the ground,
up to a height of 1 foot. Thereafter, the mist persists for 1
round per level.

Good creatures may walk along the top of the mist as if it were
solid, treating squares of difficult terrain containing the mist
as normal terrain. Evil creatures find the mist thick and
cloying, and treat squares of normal terrain containing the mist
as difficult terrain instead. Neutral creatures pass through the
mist with no effect. The mist has no effect on obstacles or
otherwise impassable terrain, and does not block sight or provide
concealment.

Except for very special circumstances (such as a celestial or
fiendish mount), mounts use the alignment of their rider when
determining how this spell affects them. You must be mounted to
enjoy the benefits of this spell. If you dismount, get knocked
off, or take any other action that separates you from your mount,
the spell immediately ends, although the mist remains for the
spell's normal duration.

A wake of light cannot follow across water, underwater, or
through the air in the case of a mount capable of walking on
water, swimming, or flight.



## Wall of Lava


**School** conjuration (creation) [earth, fire]; **Level** druid
8, sorcerer/wizard 8

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M/DF (a chunk of dried lava)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target** lava wall whose area is up to one 5-ft. square/level
  (S)

**Duration** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw** see text; **Spell Resistance** no

This spell creates a vertical *[wall of lava]* that is 1 inch
thick for every 4 caster levels and composed of up to one 5-foot
square per level. A *[wall of lava]'s* maximum height cannot
exceed half of its width (with a minimum height of 5 feet). The
wall cannot be conjured so that it occupies the same space as a
creature or object. A section of a *[wall of lava]* can be
destroyed by damage (hardness 4, hp 90), but if a section is
destroyed, the remaining lava in the wall immediately fills in
any such hole created, reducing the wall's overall size by one
5-foot square but remaining a contiguous barrier. Each time a
weapon strikes a *[wall of lava]*, it takes 2d6 points of fire
damage (or the creature who strikes the wall takes 2d6 fire
damage if the attack was via an unarmed strike or natural
attack).

A creature can move through a *[wall of lava]* as a full-round
action by making a DC 25 Strength check—failure indicates that
the creature is pushed back out of the wall to the point he just
attempted to leave. A creature with a burrow speed can move
through the wall using its burrow speed. An attempt to move
through a *[wall of lava]* inflicts 20d6 fire damage. A *[wall of
lava]* also radiates heat as if it were a *[wall of fire]*,
although the heat from a *[wall of lava]* radiates from both
sides.

Once per round as a move action, you can direct the *[wall of
lava]* to erupt. This causes a plume of lava to fire at any
target within 60 feet of either side of the wall, but reduces the
wall's overall size by 1d4 5-foot square sections. You must make
a ranged touch attack to hit the target, which takes 10d6 points
of fire damage on a hit. Holes created in a *[wall of lava]* from
this effect instantly reseal, reducing the overall size of the
wall.

All damage inflicted by physical contact with a *[wall of lava]*
continues for 1d3 rounds after exposure ceases, but this
additional damage is only half that dealt during actual contact
(that is, 1d6 or 5d6 or 10d6 points per round).



## Wall of Suppression


**School** abjuration; **Level** sorcerer/wizard 9

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (powdered adamantine worth 1,000 gp)

**Range** medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect** anti-magic wall occupying up to two 5 ft. cubes/level
  (S)

**Duration** 10 minutes/level; see text

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** no

You create a wall of glittering motes that suppresses or even
negates any magical effect passing through it. The wall appears
to have no actual substance and does not physically obstruct or
impede anything attempting to move through it. However, the wall
exerts a powerful anti-magical effect. Any magic item or magical
spell or effect of your caster level or lower that passes through
the wall is suppressed for 1 round per level. Spells or effects
with durations expire normally, even while thus suppressed. A
spell or effect with a duration greater than that of the
suppression effect resumes functioning normally when the
suppression ends. The wall affects all magical effects, including
spells, spell-like abilities, magical items, and any effects
stemming from them that pass through the wall. The wall does not
suppress a creature's ability to cast spells, use spell-like
abilities, or any other sort of limited-use abilities even if the
wall suppresses a particular application of those
abilities. However, if a creature with magical abilities that are
constant or otherwise always active passes through the wall,
those abilities are suppressed for the normal duration.

The wall blocks line of effect, so no spell or effect can pass
through the wall, but it does not block line of sight. Magic
items or spell effects with a higher caster level than yours are
unaffected by the *[wall of suppression]*. The wall does not
affect artifacts, anything stemming from the direct action of a
deity, or similarly powerful sorts of magic.



## Wandering Star Motes


**School** illusion (pattern) [light, mind-affecting]; **Level**
bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 4, witch 4

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a sprinkle of flash powder)

**Range** close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target** one living creature and special; see text

**Duration** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw**Will negates; see text; **Spell Resistance** yes

You create sparkling motes of bright light that shoot toward the
target and swirl around it in a complex pattern. The pattern
clearly outlines the target and radiates light as if it were a
sunrod, negating any concealment for the target. The target must
make a successful Will save.  If the target fails its save, it is
dazed for 1 round and must make another save on its next turn or
be dazed again for 1 round. The target must continue making Will
saves each round. If a target makes its Will save, the
*[wandering star motes]* jump to the nearest enemy within 30
feet, who must now make Will saves every round or be dazed. Any
time a target makes its Will save, the *[wandering star motes]*
jump to the next nearest enemy within 30 feet. A given creature
can only be affected by the *[wandering star motes]* once; once a
target has successfully saved against the spell, it cannot be
affected again. If there are no new targets within 30 feet of a
target that has successfully made its save, the spell immediately
ends. The spell only affects enemy creatures; your allies are not
affected.



## Ward the Faithful


**School** abjuration; **Level** inquisitor 3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Area** 10-ft.-radius emanation from touched creature

**Duration** 10 minutes/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance** no

All creatures within the area who worship the same god as you
gain a +2 deflection bonus to AC and a +2 resistance bonus on all
saves. At 12th level, these bonuses increase to +3. At 18th
level, the bonuses increase to +4.

If you do not worship a specific deity, the bonuses apply to
those who share your faith. If you do not have a specific faith
or religion, the spell provides benefits only to
yourself. Enemies gain the benefits of this spell if they worship
the same god or share the same faith as you, even if you view
them as heretical.



## Weapon of Awe


**School** transmutation; **Level** cleric 2, inquisitor 2,
  paladin 2

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch

**Target** weapon touched

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless, object); **Spell
Resistance** yes (harmless, object)

You transform a single weapon into an awe-inspiring
instrument. The weapon gains a +2 sacred bonus on damage rolls,
and if the weapon scores a critical hit, the target of that
critical hit becomes shaken for 1 round with no saving
throw. This is a mind-affecting fear effect. A ranged weapon
affected by this spell applies these effects to its ammunition.

You can't cast this spell on a natural weapon, but you can cast
it on an unarmed strike.



## Winds of Vengeance


**School** evocation [air]; **Level** cleric 9, druid 9,
sorcerer/wizard 9

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute/level

You surround yourself with a buffeting shroud of supernatural,
tornado-force winds. These winds grant you a fly speed of 60 feet
with perfect maneuverability. Neither your armor nor your load
affects this fly speed. The winds shield you from any other wind
effects, and form a shell of breathable air around you, allowing
you to fly and breathe underwater or in outer space. Ranged
weapons (including giant-thrown boulders, siege weapon
projectiles, and other massive ranged weapons) passing through
the winds are deflected by the winds and automatically miss
you. Gases and most gaseous breath weapons cannot pass though the
winds.

In addition, when a creature hits you with a melee attack, you
can shape your winds so they lash out at that creature as an
immediate action. The creature must make a Fortitude saving throw
or take 5d8 points of bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone (if
on the ground). On a failed save, Huge flying creatures are
checked and Large-sized or smaller flying creatures are blown
away instead of knocked prone. On a successful save, the damage
is halved and the creature is not knocked prone (or checked or
blown away).



## World Wave


**School** transmutation [earth, water]; **Level** druid 9,
sorcerer/wizard 9

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** see text

**Effect** see text

**Duration** 1 round/level or 1 hour/level; see text (D)

**Saving Throw** none; **Spell Resistance** yes

You cause any sort of natural terrain (including water, forest,
desert, tundra, and so on) to surge beneath your feet and safely
propel you with devastating force over great distances. This wave
of terrain undulates as it passes over the world, harmlessly
lifting or stretching objects, creatures, and phenomena with a
connection to nature but tearing through and damaging anything
else it encounters. When you cast the spell you must choose the
wave's type, either a tsunami or a swell. If you choose a
tsunami, you create a 30-foot-high tidal wave of earth or water
hurtling across the landscape that lasts for 1 round per
level. If you choose a swell, you create a more controlled and
gentle 5-foot-high wave that lasts for 1 hour per
level. Regardless of its form or composition, the crest of the
wave extends 10 feet in front of and behind you, and 5 feet per
level to both your left and right. You can stand or sit on the
crest of this wave without any fear of falling off it and can
even lie down and sleep (or take any other actions you could take
if standing on solid ground) as it travels. You can grant up to
one additional creature per level the ability to safely accompany
you on this wave.

When you first create the wave, you must choose its path by
facing the direction you wish it to travel. Once you make this
decision, you cannot change it. The wave, in either version,
moves at eight times your base land speed. Any object, creature,
or phenomena strongly connected to, or a part of, the natural
world simply rises up and down with the wave as it passes, taking
no damage or injury. However, anything else coming into contact
with the wave takes either 6d6 points of bludgeoning damage (if
the tsunami) or 1d6 points of bludgeoning damage (if the
swell). The wave damages any manufactured object or structure. On
the Material Plane, it also damages any creature of the
aberration, construct, outsider, or undead type, or with the
extraplanar subtype. Creatures with the construct or undead type
take double damage from the wave.  Other creatures, or creatures
with even one druid class level (regardless of their type), are
considered a part of the natural world and are unaffected by the
wave. Note that on other planes of existence, what is considered
to be a part of the natural world may vary at the GM's
discretion.

The wave can travel up or down the sides of natural features so
long as it does not exceed a 45-degree angle. You cannot alter
the dimensions of the wave as it travels. If the wave encounters
terrain that it cannot incorporate into itself, the wave simply
flows over or around the obstacle (creatures riding the wave are
harmlessly displaced to the side to avoid the obstacle) unless
the terrain occupies one-half or more of the area of the wave's
crest. In such cases the spell ends in 1d6 rounds as the wave
falters and collapses, unless its duration would normally cause
it to expire prior to that. The momentum of the wave carries you
forward through this new terrain without any injury until it
collapses, at which point you suffer the normal effects of the
terrain in which you are deposited. Terrain the wave cannot
incorporate includes anything primarily made from fire (such as
lava), air (such as an open cliff face), or something man-made
(such as a city).

You can only create the wave if standing on the ground. You
cannot create it when underground or on terrain that it cannot
incorporate.



## Wrathful Mantle


**School** evocation [force, light]; **Level** cleric 3, paladin
  3

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, DF

**Range** touch or 5 ft.; see text

**Target** creature touched or all creatures within 5 ft.; see
  text

**Duration** 1 minute/level

**Saving Throw** Will negates (harmless); **Spell Resistance**
yes (harmless)

A shimmering mantle of light shrouds the subject, casting light
like a torch. The subject of the spell gains a +1 resistance
bonus on all saving throws per four caster levels (maximum +5 at
20th level). The subject can end the *[wrathful mantle]* at any
time as a swift action to deal 2d8 points of force damage to all
creatures within 5 feet.



## Wrath


**School** enchantment (compulsion) [mind-affecting]; **Level**
inquisitor 1

**Casting Time** 1 standard action

**Components** V, S, M (a thorny vine)

**Range** personal

**Target** you

**Duration** 1 minute

You focus your anger against an enemy. Choose one enemy creature
that you can see. You gain a +1 morale bonus on attack rolls and
weapon damage rolls against that designated creature for every
three caster levels you have (at least +1, maximum +3). You also
receive this bonus on caster level checks made to overcome the
creature's spell resistance, if any. At 12th level, you gain the
benefits of the [Improved Critical] feat on attack rolls made
against the designated creature. This effect doesn't stack with
any other effect that expands the threat range of a weapon.
