## Barbarian

The true barbarian is a creature of bestial, savage fury. Whether
a stoic tribal champion who whips herself into a berserker frenzy
for the good of her sword-sisters, or a chaotic warrior who
revels in carnage for its own sake, all barbarians share a
similar approach to combat.  Once the red haze of bloodlust
descends, there is only a burning rage that carries them through
the screaming fray, heedless of wounds and leaving scattered
corpses in their wake.

Presented below are a number of new rage powers to help you
customize your barbarian, as well as several classic barbarian
archetypes to help you in building your character, each one
including a number of suggested rage powers that, while not
mandatory, work to flesh out the character concept. Rage powers
marked with an asterisk (\*) can be found in the *PF RPG
Core Rulebook*.

**Rage Powers (Ex)**: The following new rage powers can be taken
by any barbarian that meets the prerequisites. Totem rage powers
grant powers in a theme. A barbarian cannot select from more than
one group of totem rage powers. For example, a barbarian that
selects a beast totem rage power cannot later chose to gain any
of the spirit totem rage powers.

*Beast Totem (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian gains a +1
natural armor bonus. This bonus increases by +1 for every four
levels the barbarian has attained. A barbarian must have the
lesser beast totem rage power to select this rage power. A
barbarian must be at least 6th level to select this rage power.

*Beast Totem, Greater (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian gains
the pounce special ability, allowing her to make a full attack at
the end of a charge. In addition, the damage from her claws
increases to 1d8 (1d6 if Small) and the claws deal x3 damage on a
critical hit. A barbarian must have the beast totem rage power to
select this rage power. A barbarian must be at least 10th level
to select this rage power.

*Beast Totem, Lesser (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian gains two
claw attacks. These attacks are considered primary attacks and
are made at the barbarian's full base attack bonus. The claws
deal 1d6 points of slashing damage (1d4 if Small) plus the
barbarian's Strength modifier.

*Boasting [Taunt] (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian can incite a
creature to attack her by making an [Intimidate] check to
demoralize. If the check succeeds, the target is also shaken as
long as the barbarian is visible and raging or until it makes a
melee attack against the barbarian. The barbarian receives a +2
circumstance bonus on this check for every alcoholic drink she
has consumed during this rage.  This is a language-dependent
mind-affecting effect, and it relies on audible components. The
barbarian must be at least 6th level to select this power.

*Brawler*: While raging, the barbarian is treated as if she has
[Improved Unarmed Strike]. If she already has the feat, her
unarmed strikes deal 1d6 points of damage (1d4 if she is Small).

*Brawler, Greater*: While raging, the barbarian is treated as if
she has [Two-Weapon Fighting] when making unarmed strike
attacks. A barbarian must have the brawler rage power to select
this rage power.

*Chaos Totem (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian's form becomes
infused with chaos. She gains a +4 bonus on [Escape Artist]
checks and has a 25% chance to ignore extra damage from critical
hits and sneak attacks.  A barbarian must have the lesser chaos
totem rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be
at least 6th level to select this rage power.

*Chaos Totem, Greater (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian gains
DR/lawful equal to 1/2 her barbarian level. Her weapons and
natural weapons are considered chaotic for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction. A barbarian must have the chaos
totem rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be
at least 10th level to select this rage power.

*Chaos Totem, Lesser (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian gains a
+1 deflection bonus to AC against the attacks of lawful creatures
and a +1 resistance bonus on saving throws against confusion,
insanity, polymorph, and effects with the lawful descriptor. This
bonus increases by +1 for each chaos totem rage power she
possesses.

*Come and Get Me (Ex)*: While raging, as a free action the
barbarian may leave herself open to attack while preparing
devastating counterattacks.  Enemies gain a +4 bonus on attack
and damage rolls against the barbarian until the beginning of her
next turn, but every attack against the barbarian provokes an
attack of opportunity from her, which is resolved prior to
resolving each enemy attack. A barbarian must be at least 12th
level to select this rage power.

*[Disruptive]*: When raging, the barbarian gains [Disruptive] as
a bonus feat. The barbarian must have the superstition\* rage
power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be at least 8th
level to select this rage power.

*Elemental [Rage] (Su)*: While raging, all of the barbarian's
melee attacks deal an additional 1d6 points of energy damage
(acid, cold, electricity, or fire). The type is chosen when the
barbarian begins her rage. A barbarian must have the lesser
elemental rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian must
be at least 8th level to select this rage power. Note that the
barbarian can still use her lesser elemental rage power while
using this rage power, but she must select a different energy
type.

*Elemental [Rage], Greater (Su)*: While raging, all of the
barbarian's critical hits made with melee weapons deal an
additional 1d10 points of energy damage (2d10 if the weapon deals
x3 damage on a critical hit, 3d10 if the weapon deals x4 on a
critical hit). The type of this damage is the same as the type
chosen for the elemental rage power. A barbarian must have the
elemental rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian must
be at least 12th level to select this rage power.

*Elemental [Rage], Lesser (Su)*: As a swift action, the barbarian
can cause her melee attacks to deal an additional 1d6 points of
energy damage (acid, cold, electricity, or fire) for 1 round. A
barbarian must be at least 4th level to select this rage
power. This power can only be used once per rage.

*Energy Absorption (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian can absorb
energy from a single attack of her chosen energy type once per
rage. She does not make a saving throw against the effect but
takes no damage from it, instead gaining 1 temporary hit point
per 3 points of damage the attack would have inflicted. These
temporary hit points last until the end of the barbarian's
rage. A barbarian must have the greater energy resistance rage
power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be at least
12th level to select this rage power.

*Energy Eruption (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian can absorb
energy from a single attack and unleash it upon her enemies once
per rage. She does not make a saving throw against the effect but
takes no damage from it. At any point during the remainder of her
rage she can unleash the stored energy as a breath weapon in
either a 60-foot line or 30-foot cone. The breath weapon inflicts
damage equal to the damage from the attack absorbed by the
barbarian, but creatures within the area may make a Reflex save
(DC 10 + 1/2 the barbarian's level + the barbarian's Constitution
modifier) for half damage even if the original effect did not
allow a save. A barbarian must have the energy absorption rage
power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be at least
16th level to select this rage power.

*Energy [Resistance] (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian gains
resistance to one energy type (acid, cold, electricity, fire, or
sonic) equal to 1/2 her barbarian level (minimum 1). The energy
type is chosen when this rage power is selected and it cannot be
changed. This rage power can be selected more than once. Its
effects do not stack. Each time is applies to a different energy
type.

*Energy [Resistance], Greater (Ex)*: Once per rage, a barbarian
can reduce damage by half from a single attack against which she
has energy resistance (halve the damage, then apply
resistance). A barbarian must have the energy resistance rage
power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be at least 8th
level to select this rage power.

*Ferocious [Mount] (Ex)*: While raging and mounted, the
barbarian's mount also gains the benefits of rage (including
greater rage and mighty rage) as long as the barbarian is mounted
or adjacent to it. While her mount is raging in this way, she
must spend one additional round of rage per round. She can elect
not to pay this cost, in which case her mount does not rage.

*Ferocious [Mount], Greater (Ex)*: While raging and mounted, the
barbarian's mount gains the benefits of any rage powers that are
constant in effect when the barbarian is raging. It does not gain
the benefit of any rage powers that require actions to activate,
even if they are free actions. A barbarian must have the
ferocious mount rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian
must be at least 8th level to select this rage power.

*Ferocious [Trample] (Ex)*: While raging and mounted, the
barbarian's mount gains the trample special attack (*PF
RPG Bestiary* 305). This attack inflicts 1d8 points of damage for
a Medium mount, 2d6 for a Large mount, or 2d8 for a Huge mount,
plus 1-1/2 times the mount's Strength modifier. A successful
Reflex save (DC 10 + 1/2 the barbarian's level + the mount's
Strength modifier) halves this damage. Creatures in the mount's
path or that threaten squares it passes through may make attacks
of opportunity against either the barbarian or the mount, but not
both. A barbarian must have the ferocious mount rage power to
select this rage power. A barbarian must be at least 8th level to
select this rage power.

*Ferocious [Trample], Greater (Ex)*: A barbarian's mount can
affect creatures up to its own size with its ferocious
trample. In addition, it can make an overrun combat maneuver
check as a free action against a creature that fails its Reflex
save (or chooses not to save in order to take an attack of
opportunity) against its trample. A barbarian must have the
ferocious trample rage power to select this rage power. A
barbarian must be at least 12th level to select this rage power.

*Fiend Totem (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian sprouts dozens of
wicked barbs from her body. Anyone striking the barbarian with a
melee weapon, an unarmed strike, or a natural weapon takes 1d6
points of piercing damage. A barbarian must have the lesser fiend
totem rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be
at least 6th level to select this rage power.

*Fiend Totem, Greater (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian is
surrounded by an aura of menace. Good creatures adjacent to the
barbarian are shaken and take 2d6 points of slashing damage at
the beginning of the barbarian's turn as dozens of small cuts
open across their flesh.  Neutral creatures that are adjacent to
the barbarian are shaken, but do not take any damage. Evil
creatures are unaffected. A barbarian must have the fiend totem
rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be at
least 10th level to select this rage power.

*Fiend Totem, Lesser (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian grows a
pair of large horns, gaining a gore attack. This attack is a
primary attack (unless she is also attacking with weapons, in
which case it is a secondary attack) and is made at the
barbarian's full base attack bonus (-5 if it is a secondary
attack). The gore attack deals 1d8 points of piercing damage (1d6
if Small) plus the barbarian's Strength modifier (1/2 if it is a
secondary attack).

*Flesh Wound (Ex)*: Once per rage, the barbarian can try to avoid
serious harm from an attack. The barbarian must make a Fortitude
save with a DC equal to the damage that would be dealt by the
attack. The barbarian's armor check penalty applies on this
saving throw. If the save succeeds, the barbarian takes half
damage from the attack and the damage is nonlethal. The barbarian
must elect to use this ability after the attack roll is made, but
before the damage is rolled. A barbarian must be at least 10th
level to select this rage power.

*Good for What Ails You (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian who
takes a drink of alcohol may attempt a new saving throw against
one of the following conditions that may be affecting her:
blinded, confused, dazzled, deafened, exhausted, fatigued,
frightened, nauseated, panicked, shaken, or sickened. If she
succeeds at the save, the effect is suppressed for the duration
of the rage. She also may attempt a new saving throw if poisoned;
a successful save counts against those required for a cure, but a
failed save has no ill effect.

*Ground Breaker (Ex)*: Once per rage, the barbarian can attack
the floor around her as a standard action. This attack
automatically hits and deals damage normally. If the barbarian
manages to deal more damage than the floor's hardness, the space
she occupies and all of the squares adjacent to her become
difficult terrain. Creatures in these squares, except the
barbarian, must make a DC 15 Reflex save or be knocked prone.  A
barbarian must be at least 6th level to select this rage power.

*Guarded Life (Ex)*: While raging, if the barbarian is reduced
below 0 hit points, 1 hit point of lethal damage per barbarian
level is converted to nonlethal damage. If the barbarian is at
negative hit points due to lethal damage, she immediately
stabilizes.

*Hurling (Ex)*: As lesser hurling, but the barbarian can increase
the range increment to 20 feet or increase the size of a hurled
object by one size category. A barbarian must have the lesser
hurling rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be
at least 8th level to select this rage power.

*Hurling, Greater (Ex)*: As hurling, but the barbarian can
increase the range increment to 30 feet or increase the size of a
hurled object by two size categories. A barbarian must have the
hurling rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be
at least 12th level to select this rage power.

*Hurling, Lesser (Ex)*: As a full-round action while raging, the
barbarian can lift and hurl an object up to one size category
smaller than herself with both hands or two size categories
smaller with one hand as an improvised weapon with a range
increment of 10 feet. This inflicts damage as a falling object
(*Core Rulebook* 443) plus the barbarian's Strength bonus. This
damage is halved if the object is not made of stone, metal, or
similar material. This is a ranged touch attack, and the target
may attempt a Reflex save (DC 10 + 1/2 the barbarian's level +
the barbarian's Strength modifier) for half damage.  The
barbarian may apply [Power Attack] to this attack as a one- or
two-handed weapon, as appropriate.

*Hurling Charge (Ex)*: While raging and making a charge attack,
the barbarian may draw and throw a hurled weapon during her
charge, gaining the normal +2 attack roll bonus on the thrown
weapon attack as well as on the melee attack at the end of the
charge. The barbarian must move at least 10 feet before using a
thrown weapon and at least 10 additional feet before making a
melee attack at the end of her charge. The barbarian must have a
thrown weapon in hand or have one hand free at the beginning of
her charge. A barbarian must have the lesser hurling rage power
to select this rage power. A barbarian must be at least 6th level
to select this rage power.

*Inspire Ferocity (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian can use a
move action to impart her reckless abandon modifier to all
willing allies within 30 feet for a number of rounds equal to her
Charisma modifier (minimum 1). A barbarian must have the reckless
abandon rage power to select this rage power.

*Knockdown (Ex)*: Once per rage, the barbarian can make a trip
attack against one target in place of a melee attack. If
successful, the target takes damage equal to the barbarian's
Strength modifier and is knocked prone. This does not provoke an
attack of opportunity.

*Liquid Courage (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian increases her
morale bonus on saving throws against mind-affecting effects by
+1 for each alcoholic drink she consumes during her rage, to a
maximum of +1 increase per four barbarian levels.

*Overbearing Advance (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian inflicts
damage equal to her Strength bonus whenever she succeeds at an
overrun combat maneuver.

*Overbearing Onslaught (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian may
overrun more than one target per round, with a -2 penalty on her
CMB for each overrun check after the first. A barbarian must have
the overbearing advance rage power to select this rage power. A
barbarian must be at least 6th level to select this rage power.

*Reckless Abandon (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian can take a
-1 penalty to AC to gain a +1 bonus on attack rolls. The AC
penalty increases by -1 and the attack roll bonus increases by +1
at 4th level and every four levels thereafter.

*Roaring Drunk (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian gains a +1
morale bonus on [Intimidate] checks and to the save DC of any
fear effects she creates for each alcoholic drink she has
consumed during her rage, to a maximum of +1 per four barbarian
levels.

*Smasher (Ex)*: Once per rage, whenever the barbarian makes an
attack against an unattended object or a sunder combat maneuver,
she can ignore the object's hardness. This ability must be used
before the attack roll or sunder check is made.

*[Spellbreaker]*: When raging, the barbarian gains [Spellbreaker]
as a bonus feat. A barbarian must have the disruptive rage power
and be at least 12th level to select this rage power.

*Spirit Steed (Su)*: While raging and mounted, the barbarian's
mount gains DR/magic equal to 1/2 the barbarian's level. The
mount's natural weapons count as magical for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.  A barbarian must have the ferocious
mount rage power to select this rage power. A barbarian must be
at least 6th level to select this rage power.

*Spirit Totem (Su)*: While raging, the spirits that surround the
barbarian make it difficult for her enemies to see her. The
spirits grant the barbarian a 20% miss chance against ranged
attacks and melee attacks made by creatures that are not adjacent
to the barbarian (typically due to reach). A barbarian must have
the lesser spirit totem rage power to select this rage power. A
barbarian must be at least 6th level to select this rage power.

*Spirit Totem, Greater (Su)*: While raging, the spirits that
surround the barbarian become dangerous to any enemy adjacent to
the barbarian.  Living enemies adjacent to the barbarian at the
start of her turn take 1d8 points of negative energy damage. In
addition, the spirit wisps can now attack foes that are up to 15
feet away from the barbarian and the slam attack deals 1d6 points
of negative energy damage. A barbarian must have the spirit totem
rage power and be at least 10th level to select this rage power.

*Spirit Totem, Lesser (Su)*: While raging, the barbarian is
surrounded by spirit wisps that harass her foes. These spirits
make one slam attack each round against a living foe that is
adjacent to the barbarian. This slam attack is made using the
barbarian's full base attack bonus, plus the barbarian's Charisma
modifier. The slam deals 1d4 points of negative energy damage,
plus the barbarian's Charisma modifier.

*Staggering Drunk (Ex)*: While raging, a barbarian gains a +1
dodge bonus to AC against attacks of opportunity for each
alcoholic drink she has consumed during her rage, to a maximum of
+1 per four barbarian levels.

*Witch Hunter (Ex)*: While raging, the barbarian gains a +1 bonus
on damage rolls against creatures possessing spells or spell-like
abilities. This damage bonus increases by +1 for every four
levels the barbarian has obtained. A barbarian must have the
superstition\* rage power to select this rage power.

### Breaker

While most barbarians are skilled at breaking things, some find
the need to destroy their surroundings an almost uncontrollable
urge when in the middle of a rage. These barbarians are a danger
not only to their foes, but also to the very environment around
them. A breaker barbarian has the following class features.

**Destructive (Ex)**: Whenever the breaker barbarian makes a
melee attack that targets an unattended object or makes a sunder
combat maneuver, she adds half her barbarian level (minimum +1)
on the damage roll. This ability replaces fast movement.

**Battle Scavenger (Ex)**: At 3rd level, the breaker barbarian
suffers no penalty on attack rolls when using an improvised
weapon or a weapon with the broken condition. In addition, she
gains a +1 bonus on damage rolls with improvised or broken
weapons for every three levels beyond 3rd. This ability replaces
trap sense.

**Rage Powers**: The following rage powers complement the breaker
archetype: ground breaker, smasher, and strength surge\*.

### Brutal Pugilist

Some barbarians focus on using their bare hands to tear their
opponents limb from limb. These brutal pugilists also learn a
great deal about various combat maneuvers, using them to cripple
or crush their foes. A brutal pugilist has the following class
features.

**Savage Grapple (Ex)**: At 2nd level, the brutal pugilist takes
only half the normal penalties to Dexterity, attack rolls, and
combat maneuver checks when she has the grappled condition. She
can make an attack of opportunity against creatures trying to
grapple her even if they possess the [Improved Grapple] feat or
the grab special attack. If she hits with this attack of
opportunity, she gains a +2 circumstance bonus to her CMD against
the grapple attempt. She cannot make these attacks of opportunity
once a grapple has succeeded. This ability replaces uncanny
dodge.

**Pit Fighter (Ex)**: At 3rd level, the brutal pugilist has
learned combat tricks from fighting in pit brawls and
gladiatorial arenas. She selects one combat maneuver and gains a
+1 insight bonus on her CMB or to her CMD in that maneuver. This
bonus increases to +2 if the barbarian is wearing no armor
(shields are allowed). At every three levels after 3rd, the
barbarian may select another combat maneuver and add this bonus
on her CMB or to her CMD. This bonus can be applied to each
maneuver no more than twice, once on CMB and once to CMD. This
ability replaces trap sense.

**Improved Savage Grapple (Ex)**: At 5th level, the brutal
pugilist takes no penalties to Dexterity, attack rolls, and
combat maneuver checks when she has the grappled condition. She
also is treated as one size larger than her actual size when
determining whether she can be grappled using the grab ability or
swallowed by another creature. This ability replaces improved
uncanny dodge.

**Rage Powers**: The following rage powers complement the brutal
pugilist archetype: animal fury\*, brawler, greater brawler,
knockback\*, knockdown, overbearing advance, overbearing
onslaught, and strength surge\*.

### Drunken Brute

Barbarians are known for their ability to consume potent drink,
but drunken brutes turn drinking into a combat tactic, using the
potent liquor to fuel their rage and grant them additional
powers. A drunken brute has the following class feature.

**Raging Drunk (Ex)**: While raging, the drunken brute can drink
a potion, or a tankard of ale or similar quantity of alcohol, as
a move action that does not provoke attacks of opportunity. A
potion has its normal effect, while an alcoholic drink allows the
barbarian to maintain her rage that round without expending a
round of rage for the day (instead of the alcohol's normal
effects). For each alcoholic drink consumed while raging, the
barbarian is nauseated for 1 round when her rage expires, in
addition to the normal fatigue that follows a rage.  Tireless
rage does not negate this nauseated condition but the internal
fortitude rage power does. This ability replaces fast movement.

**Rage Powers**: The following rage powers complement the drunken
brute archetype: boasting taunt, good for what ails you, internal
fortitude\*, liquid courage, moment of clarity\*, roaring drunk,
and staggering drunk.

### Elemental Kin

Some barbarian tribes have strong ties to the elemental forces of
nature. Their shamans anoint the warriors at birth, tying them to
the patron element of the tribe and granting them lasting boons
against such forces. An elemental kin has the following class
feature.

**Elemental Fury (Ex)**: At 3rd level, whenever the elemental kin
takes an amount of energy damage equal to or greater than her
barbarian level while raging, she adds 1 to the total number of
rounds that she can rage that day. At 6th level, and every three
levels thereafter, the number of extra rounds per energy attack
increases by +1, to a maximum of +6 rounds per energy attack at
at 18th level. This ability replaces trap sense.

**Rage Powers**: The following rage powers complement the
elemental kin archetype: elemental rage, energy absorption,
energy eruption, energy resistance, greater elemental rage,
greater energy resistance, and lesser elemental rage.

### Hurler

A raging barbarian is frightening enough in melee, but some
become skilled at throwing objects at their foes before closing
in for the kill. A hurler has the following class feature.

**Skilled Thrower (Ex)**: The hurler is skilled at throwing
objects in combat. Increase the range increment of any thrown
weapon or object by 10 feet. This ability replaces fast movement.

**Rage Powers**: The following rage powers complement the hurler
archetype: hurling, greater hurling, hurling charge, lesser
hurling, strength surge\*, and surprise accuracy\*.

### Invulnerable Rager

Some barbarians learn to take whatever comes their way, shrugging
off mortal wounds with ease. These barbarians invite their
enemies to attack them, and use pain to fuel their rage. An
invulnerable rager has the following class features.

**Invulnerability (Ex)**: At 2nd level, the invulnerable rager
gains DR/— equal to half her barbarian level. This damage
reduction is doubled against nonlethal damage. This ability
replaces uncanny dodge, improved uncanny dodge, and damage
reduction.

**Extreme Endurance (Ex)**: At 3rd level, the invulnerable rager
is inured to either hot or cold climate effects (choose one) as
if using *[Endure Elements]*.  In addition, the barbarian gains 1
point of fire or cold resistance for every three levels beyond
3rd. This ability replaces trap sense.

**Rage Powers**: The following rage powers complement the
invulnerable rager archetype: come and get me, guarded life,
increased damage reduction\*, inspire ferocity, reckless abandon,
and renewed vigor\*.

### Mounted Fury

Many barbarian tribes are masters of the horse, teaching their
members how to ride from a young age. As a result, barbarians
from such tribes are even more terrifying when mounted, using
their steeds' speed and strength to great advantage. A mounted
fury has the following class features.

**Fast Rider (Ex)**: The speed of any mount the barbarian rides
is increased by 10 feet. This ability replaces fast movement.

**Bestial Mount (Ex)**: At 5th level, the mounted fury gains the
service of a feral mount. This ability functions as a druid's
animal companion, using the barbarian's level -4 as her effective
druid level. This companion must be one that she is capable of
riding and is suitable as a mount. A Medium barbarian can select
a camel or a horse. A Small barbarian can select a pony or a
wolf, but can also select a boar or a dog if she is at least 8th
level. Whenever a barbarian is raging while mounted on her
bestial mount, the mount gains a +2 morale bonus to its
Strength. This ability replaces uncanny dodge and improved
uncanny dodge.

**Rage Powers**: The following rage powers complement the mounted
fury archetype: ferocious mount, ferocious trample, greater
ferocious mount, greater ferocious trample, and spirit steed.

### Savage Barbarian

Some barbarians are truly savage, having little training in
modern arms.  These savage barbarians learn to avoid blows and
toughen up their skin.  A savage barbarian has the following
class features.

**Naked Courage (Ex)**: At 3rd level, the savage barbarian gains
a +1 dodge bonus to AC and a +1 morale bonus on saving throws
against fear when wearing no armor (shields are allowed). This
bonus increases by +1 for every six levels after 3rd. This
ability replaces trap sense.

**Natural [Toughness] (Ex)**: At 7th level, the savage barbarian
gains a +1 natural armor bonus to AC when wearing no armor
(shields are allowed). This bonus increases by +1 for every three
levels beyond 7th. This ability replaces damage reduction.

**Rage Powers**: The following rage powers complement the savage
barbarian archetype: flesh wound, guarded stance\*, increased
damage reduction\*, intimidating glare\*, rolling dodge\*,
superstition\*, and terrifying howl\*.

### Superstitious

Many barbarians distrust magic. While most just shy away from
magic, others focus their rage on users of such foul arts. These
barbarians are naturally distrusting, and develop keen senses to
protect them from harm. A superstitious barbarian has the
following class features.

**Sixth Sense (Ex)**: At 3rd level, the superstitious barbarian
gains a +1 bonus on initiative and a +1 insight bonus to AC
during surprise rounds. This bonus increases by +1 for every
three levels after 3rd.  This ability replaces trap sense.

**Keen Senses (Ex)**: At 7th level, the superstitious barbarian
gains low-light vision (triple normal vision range in dim light
if she already has low-light vision). At 10th level, she gains
darkvision 60 feet (or adds 60 feet to the range of any
darkvision already possessed). At 13th level, she gains scent. At
16th level, she gains blindsense 30 feet. At 19th level, she
gains blindsight 30 feet. This ability replaces damage reduction.

**Rage Powers**: The following rage powers complement the
superstitious archetype: clear mind\*, disruptive, roused
anger\*, spellbreaker, superstition\*, and witch hunter.

### Totem Warrior

A barbarian often has a special totem that is the patron of her
tribe.  While individual totems vary, those in the tribe that
call upon a totem receive similar abilities. Totem warrior
barbarians can select from the following rage powers.

**Rage Powers**: The totem warrior is based entirely upon his
totem rage powers. In addition to the totem powers themselves,
the following rage powers complement the totem warrior archtype
(depending on the totem chosen): animal fury\*, low-light
vision\*, night vision\*, raging climber\*, raging leaper\*,
raging swimmer\*, and swift foot\*.


## Bard

A good bard can sing the birds from the trees or talk a king into
abdicating his throne. A jack of all trades, the bard sees little
need to restrict himself to a single talent, picking up a little
of this and a little of that, but always with a keen eye for
other people and how they might be manipulated, whether through
artistic performances or more mundane avenues. Presented below
are several classic bardic themes.

### Arcane Duelist

A master of the martial applications of steel and spell, the
arcane duelist blends both into a lethal combination.

**[Arcane Strike]**: Arcane duelists gain [Arcane Strike] as a
bonus feat at 1st level. This ability replaces bardic knowledge.

**Bardic Performance**: An arcane duelist gains the following
types of bardic performance.

*Rallying Cry (Su)*: At 1st level, an arcane duelist can use
performance to rally dispirited allies. Each round he makes an
[Intimidate] check. Any ally (including the bard) within 30 feet
may use this check in place of his own saving throw against fear
and despair effects. Those already under a fear or despair effect
can attempt a new save each round using the bard's [Intimidate]
check.  Rallying cry does not work on effects that don't allow
saves. This is a mind-affecting ability that uses audible
components. This performance replaces countersong.

*Bladethirst (Su)*: An arcane duelist of 6th level or higher may
use performance to grant one weapon, one natural weapon, one end
of a double weapon, or 50 items of ammunition of the same type
within 30 feet a +1 enhancement bonus. This enhancement bonus
increases by +1 for every three levels after 6th (maximum +5 at
18th level). These bonuses stack with existing bonuses and may be
used to increase the item's enhancement bonus up to +5 or to add
any of the following weapon properties: *[defending]*,
*[distance]*, *[ghost touch]*, *[keen]*, *[mighty cleaving]*,
*[returning]*, *[shock]*, *[shocking burst]*, *[seeking]*,
*[speed]*, or *[wounding]*. If the weapon is not magical, at
least a +1 enhancement bonus must be added before adding special
abilities. This performance replaces suggestion.

*Mass Bladethirst (Su)*: An arcane duelist of 18th level or
higher can use his bladethirst performance to enhance the weapons
of as many allies as desired within 30 feet. The bonus provided
by this power is +4 if conferred on two allies, +3 for three
allies, +2 for four allies, and +1 for five or more allies. The
power granted to each weapon must be identical. This ability
replaces mass suggestion.

**Bonus Feats**: An arcane duelist weaves might and magic in his
combat style, gaining the following bonus feats at 2nd level and
every four levels thereafter: 2nd level—[Combat Casting], 6th
level—[Disruptive], 10th level—[Spellbreaker], 14th
level—[Penetrating Strike], 18th level—[Greater Penetrating
Strike]. This ability replaces versatile performance and
well-versed.

**Arcane Bond (Ex)**: At 5th level, an arcane duelist gains the
arcane bond ability as a wizard, using a weapon as his bonded
item, allowing him to cast any one addition spell that he knows
once per day. He may not choose a familiar or other type of
bonded item. He may use the hand holding his bonded weapon for
somatic components. This ability replaces lore master.

**Arcane Armor (Ex)**: At 10th level, an arcane duelist gains
Medium Armor Proficiency and can cast bard spells in medium armor
with no chance of arcane spell failure. At 16th level, he gains
Heavy Armor Proficiency and can cast bard spells in heavy armor
with no arcane spell failure. This ability replaces jack of all
trades.

### Archivist

Some bards greatly prefer academic pursuits to the drama (and
sometimes melodrama) of their artistic brethren.

**Bardic Performance**: An archivist gains the following types of
  bardic performance.

*Naturalist (Ex)*: An archivist who has identified a creature
with a [Knowledge] check appropriate to its type can use
performance to share strategies for defeating it with allies in
combat. The archivist and any allies within 30 feet gain a +1
insight bonus to AC and on attack rolls and saving throws against
exceptional, supernatural, and spell-like abilities used by
creatures of that specific kind of monster (e.g., frost giants,
not all giants or all humanoids). This bonus increases by +1 at
5th level and every six levels thereafter. This
language-dependent ability requires visual and audible
components. This ability replaces inspire courage.

*Lamentable Belaborment (Ex)*: At 6th level, an archivist can
bewilder a creature already fascinated by his performance. Using
this ability does not disrupt the fascinate effect, but it does
require a standard action to activate (in addition to the free
action to continue the fascinate effect). The target must make a
Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the bard's level + the bard's Cha
modifier). Success renders the target immune to this power for 24
hours, but failure leaves the target either dazed or confused
(archivist's choice) for as long as the performance continues.
If the target takes damage, this effect ends immediately. This
mind-affecting ability relies on audible components. This ability
replaces suggestion.

*Pedantic Lecture (Su)*: At 18th level, an archivist can affect
as many creatures with lamentable belaborment as he currently has
fascinated. In addition, he may choose to cause targets to fall
asleep rather than be dazed or confused. This ability replaces
mass suggestion.

**Lore Master (Ex)**: At 2nd level, an archivist may take 20 on
[Knowledge] checks once per day, plus once per six levels beyond
2nd. This ability replaces versatile performance.

**Magic Lore (Ex)**: At 2nd level, an archivist gains a bonus on
[Spellcraft] checks to identify magic items or decipher scrolls
equal to half his bard level and may take 10 on such checks. An
archivist can use [Disable Device] to disarm magical traps as per
a rogue's trapfinding ability and gains a +4 bonus on saves
against magical traps, language-dependent effects, and symbols,
glyphs, and magical writings of any kind. This ability replaces
well-versed.

**Jack of All Trades (Ex)**: At 5th level, an archivist can use
any skill, even if the skill normally requires him to be
trained. At 11th level, he considers all skills to be class
skills, and at 17th level he can take 10 on any skill check, even
if it is not normally allowed. This ability replaces lore master.

**Probable Path (Ex)**: At 10th level, an archivist can calculate
the action likely to bring success with the least risk. Once per
day, he can take 10 on any d20 roll. He may use this ability one
additional time per day for every three levels after 10th. This
ability replaces jack of all trades.

### Court Bard

Spending years studying all of the finer points of erudition and
etiquette, the court bard takes up the role of resplendent
proclaimer and artist-in-residence at the hand of nobility,
royalty, and the well-moneyed elite who aspire to join their
ranks.

**Bardic Performance**: A court bard gains the following types of
bardic performance.

*Satire (Su)*: A court bard can use performance to undermine the
confidence of enemies who hear it, causing them to take a -1
penalty on attack and damage rolls (minimum 1) and a -1 penalty
on saves against fear and charm effects as long as the bard
continues performing. This penalty increases by -1 at 5th level
and every six levels thereafter.  Satire is a language-dependent,
mind-affecting ability that uses audible components. This
performance replaces inspire courage.

*Mockery (Su)*: A court bard of 3rd level or higher can subtly
ridicule and defame a specific individual. The bard selects one
target who can hear his performance. That individual takes a -2
penalty on Charisma checks and Charisma-related skill checks as
long as the bard continues performing. This penalty increases by
-1 every four levels after 3rd.  Mockery is a language-dependent,
mind-affecting ability that relies on audible components. This
performance replaces inspire competence.

*Glorious Epic (Su)*: A court bard of 8th level or higher can
weave captivating tales that engross those who hear them. Enemies
within 30 feet become flat-footed unless they succeed at a Will
save (DC 10 + 1/2 the bard's level + the bard's Cha modifier). A
save renders them immune to this ability for 24 hours. Glorious
epic is a language-dependent, mind-affecting ability that uses
audible components. This performance replaces dirge of doom.

*Scandal (Su)*: A court bard of 14th level or higher can combine
salacious gossip and biting calumny to incite a riot. Each enemy
within 30 feet is affected as if by a *[song of discord]* for as
long as it can hear the performance. A successful Will save (DC
10 + 1/2 the bard's level + the bard's Cha modifier) negates the
effect, and that creature is immune to this ability for 24
hours. Scandal is a language-dependent, mind-affecting ability
that uses audible components.  This performance replaces
frightening tune.

**Heraldic Expertise (Ex)**: A court bard gains a bonus equal to
half his bard level on [Diplomacy], [Knowledge] (history),
[Knowledge] (local), and [Knowledge] (nobility) checks (minimum
+1). Once per day, the court bard can also reroll a check against
one of these skills, though he must take the result of the second
roll even if it is worse. He can reroll one additional time per
day at 5th level and every five levels thereafter. This ability
replaces bardic knowledge.

**Wide Audience (Su)**: At 5th level, a court bard can choose to
affect a 60-foot cone instead of a 30-foot radius with bardic
performances that affect an area. In addition, for every five
levels beyond 5th, the area of such powers is increased by 10
feet (radius) or 20 feet (cone). If the power instead affects
multiple creatures, it affects one additional creature than
normal for every five levels beyond 5th. This does not affect
powers that affect only a single creature. This ability replaces
lore master and jack of all trades.

### Detective

Piecing together clues and catching the guilty with sheer
cleverness, the detective is skilled at divining the truth.

**Bardic Performance**: A detective gains the following types of
bardic performance.

*Careful Teamwork (Su)*: A detective uses performance to keep
allies coordinated, alert, and ready for action. All allies
within 30 feet gain a +1 bonus on Initiative checks,
[Perception], and [Disable Device] checks for 1 hour. They also
gain a +1 insight bonus on Reflex saves and to AC against traps
and when they are flat-footed. These bonuses increase by +1 at
5th level and every six levels thereafter. Using this ability
requires 3 rounds of continuous performance, and the targets must
be able to see and hear the bard throughout the performance. This
ability is language-dependent and requires visual and audible
components. This performance replaces inspire courage.

*True Confession (Su)*: At 9th level, a detective can use
performance to trick a creature into revealing its secrets. Using
this ability requires a successful [Sense Motive] check to see
through a [Bluff] or notice mental compulsion. After 3 continuous
rounds of performance, the target must make a Will save (DC 10 +
1/2 the bard's level + the bard's Cha modifier). Success renders
the target immune to this power for 24 hours.  On a failed save,
a liar inadvertently reveals the lie and the truth behind it. A
creature under a charm or compulsion reveals the nature of its
enchantment and who placed it (if the creature knows) and gains a
new saving throw to break free from the enchantment. This ability
is language-dependent and requires audible components. Using this
power requires only 2 rounds of performance at 15th level, and 1
round of performance at 20th level. This performance replaces
inspire greatness.

*Show Yourselves (Ex)*: At 15th level, a detective can use
performance to compel creatures to reveal themselves when
hiding. All enemies within 30 feet must make a Will save (DC 10 +
1/2 the bard's level + the bard's Cha modifier). If they fail,
they must cease using [Stealth], unlock and open doors between
themselves and the detective, and dismiss, suppress, or dispel if
necessary magical effects that grant invisibility or any other
form of concealment from the detective. As long as they can hear
the performance, affected creatures may not attack or flee until
they have eliminated every such effect, though they are freed
from this compulsion immediately if attacked. Creatures in the
area must make this save each round the bard continues his
performance. This ability is language-dependent and requires
audible components. This performance replaces inspire heroics.

**Eye for Detail (Ex)**: A detective gains a bonus equal to half
his level on [Knowledge] (local), [Perception], and [Sense
Motive] checks, as well as [Diplomacy] checks to gather
information (minimum +1). This ability replaces bardic knowledge.

**Arcane Insight (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a detective can find and
disable magical traps, like a rogue's trapfinding ability. In
addition, he gains a +4 bonus on saving throws made against
illusions and a +4 bonus on caster level checks and saving throws
to see through disguises and protections against divination (such
as *[magic aura]*, *[misdirection]*, and *[nondetection]*). This
ability replaces well-versed.

**Arcane Investigation**: In addition, a detective's class spell
list includes the following: 1st—*[Detect Chaos]/evil/law/good*;
2nd—*[Zone of Truth]*; 3rd—*[Arcane Eye], [Speak with Dead],
[Speak with Plants]*; 4th—*[Discern Lies]*; 5th—*[Prying Eyes],
[Stone Tell]*; 6th—*[Discern Location], [Find the Path], [Greater
Prying Eyes], [Moment of Prescience]*. A detective may add one of
these spells or any divination spell on the bard spell list to
his list of spells known at 2nd level and every four levels
thereafter.  This ability replaces versatile performance.

### Magician

A magician dabbles in performance, but sees it as a means to tap
into universal energies and channel them.

**Bardic Performance**: A magician gains the following types of
bardic performance.

*Dweomercraft (Su)*: A magician can use performance to manipulate
magical energies. Allies of the magician gain a +1 bonus on
caster level checks, concentration checks, and attack rolls with
spells and spell-like abilities. This bonus increases by +1 at
5th level and every six levels thereafter. This ability relies on
visual and audible components. It replaces inspire courage.

*Spell Suppression (Su)*: A 8th level, a magician can use
performance to counter the spells of his foes. Once the bard
begins using this performance, he tracks the number of rounds it
has been in use. While performing, as an immediate action, he can
attempt to counter any spell that he can identify using
[Spellcraft], so long as that spell's level is equal or less than
the total number of rounds he has been performing spell
suppression. The attempt to counter the spell is made as if using
*[Dispel Magic]*, using the bard's level as the caster level. If
successful, the bardic performance immediately ends. This ability
requires audible components. This performance replaces dirge of
doom.

*Metamagic Mastery (Ex)*: At 14th level, a magician can use
performance to apply a metamagic feat to a spell he is about to
cast without increasing the casting time. The bard must still
expend a higher-level slot to cast this spell. This causes the
performance to immediately end.  This ability requires audible
components. This performance replaces frightening tune.

**Magical Talent (Ex)**: A magician gains a bonus equal to half
his level on [Knowledge] (arcana), [Spellcraft], and [Use Magic
Device] checks. This ability replaces bardic knowledge.

**[Improved Counterspell]**: A magician gains [Improved
Counterspell] as a bonus feat.  This ability replaces
countersong.

**Extended Performance (Su)**: At 2nd level, a magician can
extend the duration of bardic performance after he stops
concentrating by sacrificing a spell slot as a swift action. The
performance effect lingers for 1 extra round per level of the
spell. Only one spell may be sacrificed per performance, and
performance types that take affect after a specific number of
rounds cannot be extended. This ability replaces well-versed.

**Expanded Repertoire (Ex)**: At 2nd level and every four levels
thereafter, a magician can add one spell to his spells known from
the spell list of any arcane spellcasting class. The spell must
be of a level he can cast. This ability replaces versatile
performance.

**Arcane Bond (Ex)**: At 5th level, a magician gains the arcane
bond ability as a wizard. He may not choose a familiar or a
weapon as a bonded item. This ability replaces lore master.

**Wand Mastery (Ex)**: At 10th level, when a magician uses a wand
containing a spell on his spell list, he uses his Charisma bonus
to set the wand's save DC. At 16th level, when using such a wand,
he uses his caster level in place of the wand's caster
level. This ability replaces jack of all trades.

### Sandman

Combining performance with stealth, trickery, and guile, the
sandman uses cleverness to keep others off-balance.

**Bardic Performance**: A sandman gains the following types of
bardic performance.

*Stealspell (Su)*: A sandman can use performance to steal spells
from his foes and add them to his list of spells known. Once the
performance is started, the bard can steal a prepared spell or a
spell known from another creature with a touch attack as a
standard action. The target receives a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the
bard's level + the bard's Cha bonus) to negate the effect. The
sandman may choose a spell to steal, but if the target does not
possess the spell, the bardic performance immediately
ends. Otherwise the spell stolen is random, but it is always of
the highest level that the bard can cast, if possible. The target
loses the prepared spell or spell known and the sandman adds it
to his list of spells known for as long as the performance
continues, after which it reverts to the original
recipient. While stolen, the bard can cast the spell using his
available spell slots. This use does not consume the stolen
spell. If the bard steals another spell while a spell is stolen,
the previous spell immediately reverts to its original owner.
This ability requires visual components. This performance
replaces inspire courage.

*Slumber Song (Sp)*: At 6th level, a sandman can use his
performance to cause a creature he has already fascinated to fall
asleep (as *[Deep Slumber]*, but with no HD limit). Otherwise,
this ability functions like suggestion. This performance replaces
suggestion.

*Dramatic Subtext (Su)*: At 9th level, a sandman can use bardic
performance to cast spells without obvious visual or audible
components while retaining the spell's normal effects. Observers
must succeed at a [Perception] check opposed by a sandman's
[Sleight of Hand] check to notice that the sandman is the source
of the spellcasting (though spellcasting still provokes attacks
of opportunity). The bard must use this performance for at least
2 rounds before casting a spell; otherwise he is automatically
detected and the performance ends. This ability replaces inspire
greatness.

*Greater Stealspell (Su)*: A sandman's stealspell power improves
at 15th level. When a target fails a save against his stealspell
performance, the sandman discovers its spell resistance (if any)
and all spells it has prepared or knows. He can then choose which
spell to steal. The sandman may forgo stealing a spell and
instead reduce the target's SR by an amount equal to half his
bard level and gain that amount of spell resistance for as long
as he continues performing. If he steals additional spell
resistance, it stacks with previously stolen SR. If he steals a
spell or ceases performing, the spell resistance immediately
reverts back to its owner. This performance replaces inspire
heroics.

*Mass Slumber Song (Sp)*: At 18th level, a sandman can use
slumber song to affect any number of fascinated creatures within
30 feet. Otherwise, this ability functions like *[Mass
Suggestion]*. This performance replaces *[Mass Suggestion]*.

*Spell Catching (Su)*: At 20th level, a sandman who saves against
a spell or spell-like ability that targets only him (not
including area spells) may use bardic performance as an immediate
action. He must attempt a caster level check (DC 10 + the spell's
original caster level). If it succeeds, the sandman can absorb
the spell effect without harm and immediately recast that spell
(using the original caster's level and save DC) or any spell he
knows of that level or lower. Using this ability consumes a
number of rounds of bardic performance equal to the spell's
level, even if the check fails. This performance replaces deadly
performance.

**Master of Deception (Ex)**: A sandman gains a bonus equal to
half his level on [Bluff], [Sleight of Hand], and [Stealth]
checks. He may also disarm magical traps with [Disable Device] as
a rogue's trapfinding ability. This ability replaces bardic
knowledge.

**Sneakspell (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a sandman adds +1 to the save
DC of spells and bardic performance against opponents who are
denied their Dex bonus. This increases to +2 at 10th level and +3
at 18th level. In addition, at 6th level he gains a +2 bonus on
caster level checks to overcome spell resistance against such
foes, and this bonus increases to +4 at 14th level. This ability
replaces versatile performance.

**Trap Sense (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a sandman gains a +1 bonus on
Reflex saves against traps and a +1 dodge bonus to AC against
traps. These bonuses increase by +1 every three levels after
3rd. This ability replaces inspire competence.

**Sneak Attack (Ex)**: At 5th level, a sandman inflicts +1d6
points of damage against targets within 30 feet that he flanks or
that are denied their Dex bonus to AC against him. This damage
increases by +1d6 every five levels after 5th. This ability
replaces lore master.

### Savage Skald

Far from civilization, furious tribes have their own war-singers,
work-chanters, and lore-keepers, savaging enemies with song and
sword alike.

**Bardic Performance**: A savage skald gains the following types
of bardic performance.

*Inspiring Blow (Su)*: A savage skald roars his war-cries with
each telling blow. When he confirms a critical hit, he can start
this performance as an immediate action (ending any other
performances). He gains temporary hit points equal to his
Charisma modifier (if positive), and all allies within 30 feet
gain a +1 morale bonus on their next attack roll prior to the
start of his next turn. These temporary hit points remain until
the bard ends his performance. This performance replaces
fascinate.

*Incite [Rage] (Su)*: At 6th level, a savage skald can induce a
furious rage in one creature within 30 feet.  This effect
functions as a *[Rage]* spell that lasts as long as the target
can hear the bard's performance; however, unwilling creatures can
be affected if they fail a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the bard's
level + the bard's Cha modifier). Success renders the target
immune to this power for 24 hours. The bard cannot target himself
with this ability. If the target has the rage class feature, it
can instead immediately rage and stay in this rage without
consuming rounds of rage per day as long as the bard continues
performing. This mind-affecting effect requires audible
components. This performance replaces suggestion.

*Song of the Fallen (Sp)*: At 10th level, a savage skald can
duplicate the effect of a *horn of Valhalla*. This effect
requires 10 continuous rounds of performance and summons
barbarians as a silver horn at 10th level, as a brass horn at
13th level, as a bronze horn at 16th level, and as an iron horn
at 19th level. The warriors remain only as long as the bard
continues his performance. This ability requires audible
components. This performance replaces jack of all trades.

*Berserkergang (Ex)*: At 12th level, a savage skald can inspire a
rapturous battle trance that suppresses pain, stunning, and fear
effects for one creature, plus one additional creature per three
levels after 12th. Affected creatures also gain DR 5/— (DR 10/—
against nonlethal damage); this benefit stacks with the damage
reduction class ability of barbarians. This mind-affecting
ability requires audible components.  This performance replaces
soothing performance.

*Battle Song (Su)*: At 18th level, a savage skald can affect all
allies within 30 feet when using performance to incite rage. This
performance replaces mass suggestion.

### Sea Singer

The sea singer calls the blue waters his home, and is much in
demand among sea captains wishing good fortune for their crew and
hull as they ply the tradewinds far and wide.

**Bardic Performance**: A sea singer gains the following types of
bardic performance.

*Sea Shanty (Su)*: A sea singer learns to counter seasickness and
exhaustion during long sea voyages. Each round of a sea shanty,
he makes a [Perform] skill check. Allies within 30 feet
(including the sea singer) may use his [Perform] check in place
of a saving throw against becoming exhausted, fatigued,
nauseated, or sickened; if already under such an effect, a new
save is allowed each round of the sea shanty, using the bard's
[Perform] check for the save. A sea shanty has no effect on
instantaneous effects or effects that do not allow saves. This
ability requires audible components. This performance replaces
countersong.

*Still Water (Su)*: At 3rd level, a sea singer can use
performance to calm rough waters within 30 feet, reducing the DC
for [Profession] (sailor) and [Swim] checks, as well as for
[Acrobatics] and [Climb] checks aboard ship, by an amount equal
to the bard's level (to a minimum of DC 10) for as long he
continues to perform. He can extend this duration to 1 hour by
playing for 10 consecutive rounds. This ability requires audible
components.  This performance replaces inspire competence.

*Whistle the Wind (Su)*: A sea singer of 6th level or higher can
use performance to create a *[Gust of Wind]*. This wind lasts for
as long as he continues his performance. He can extend this
duration to 1 minute by playing for 5 consecutive rounds. This
performance replaces suggestion.

*Call the Storm (Su)*: At 18th level, a sea singer can use
performance to duplicate *[Control Water], [Control Weather],
[Control Winds],* or *[Storm of Vengeance]*, using his bard level
as the caster level. Using this ability requires 1 round of
continuous performance per level of the spell (as if he were a
druid). These effects continue for as long as the bard continues
performing (the effects on *control weather* happen immediately),
but not longer than the spell's normal duration. This performance
replaces mass suggestion.

**World Traveler (Ex)**: A sea singer gains a bonus equal to half
his bard level on [Knowledge] (geography), [Knowledge] (local),
[Knowledge] (nature), and [Linguistics] checks. He can reroll a
check against one of these skills, but must take the result of
the second roll even if it is worse. He can reroll one additional
time per day at 5th level and every five levels thereafter. This
ability replaces bardic knowledge.

**Familiar**: At 2nd level, a sea singer acquires an exotic pet—a
monkey or parrot (treat as raven)—that gains abilities as a
wizard's familiar, using the sea singer's bard level as his
wizard level. This ability replaces versatile performance.

**Sea Legs (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a sea singer gains a +4 bonus on
saving throws against air and water effects and effects that
would cause the sea singer to slip, trip, or otherwise be knocked
prone. He gains a +2 bonus to CMD against grapple, overrun, and
trip. This ability replaces well-versed.

### Street Performer

Whether acrobat, troubadour, or thespian, the street performer
mixes with the masses, singing for his supper.

**Bardic Performance**: A street performer gains the following
types of bardic performance.

*Disappearing Act (Su)*: A street performer can use performance
to divert attention from an ally. All creatures within 30 feet
that fail a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the bard's level + the bard's
Cha modifier) treat one creature chosen by the bard as if it were
*invisible*. This performance affects one additional creature at
5th level and every 6 levels thereafter. If the targets take any
action that would cause them to become visible, they become
visible to everyone. The bard cannot use this ability on
himself. This ability is a mind-affecting effect that requires
visual components. This performance replaces inspire courage.

*Harmless Performer (Su)*: At 3rd level, a street performer can
use performance to appear meek and unworthy of being
attacked. While using this performance, whenever an enemy targets
the street performer, the enemy must succeed at a Will save (DC
10 + 1/2 the bard's level + the bard's Cha bonus) or be unable to
attack the bard this round, as per *[Sanctuary]*. The enemy loses
the attack that targeted the bard, but may spend additional
attacks targeting other creatures. If the opponent was targeting
the street performer with a spell, it must succeed at a
concentration check at the same DC or lose the spell. If this
check succeeds, it may target another creature with the spell
instead. This mind-affecting ability requires audible or visual
components. This performance replaces inspire competence.

*Madcap Prank (Su)*: At 9th level, a street performer can use
performance to discomfit a target within 30 feet, causing its
clothing to become tangled, its headgear to fall down over its
eyes, or even causing it to slip and fall or otherwise be made to
appear a fool. The target must make a Reflex save (DC 10 + 1/2
the bard's level + the bard's Cha modifier) each round that it
hears or sees the performance, or it takes one of the following
random effects each round: 1—blinded, 2—dazzled, 3—deafened,
4—entangled, 5—fall prone, 6—nauseated. Each effect lasts 1
round. This performance replaces inspire greatness.

*Slip through the Crowd (Su)*: At 15th level, a street
performer's disappearing act enables affected creatures to move
through crowd squares and enemy-occupied squares without
impediment. Affected creatures are treated as if having *[Greater
Invisibility]*, but enemies gain a new saving throw to notice
them each time they are attacked. This performance replaces
inspire heroics.

**Gladhanding**: A street performer earns double the normal
amount of money from [Perform] checks. As a standard action, he
may use a [Bluff] check in place of a [Diplomacy] check to
improve a creature's attitude for 1 minute, after which its
attitude becomes one step worse than originally. This ability
replaces countersong.

**Streetwise**: A street performer gains a bonus equal to half
his level on [Bluff], [Disguise], [Knowledge] (local), and
[Sleight of Hand] checks, [Diplomacy] or [Intimidate] checks made
to influence crowds, and [Diplomacy] checks to gather information
(minimum +1). This replaces bardic knowledge.

**Quick Change (Ex)**: At 5th level, a street performer can don a
disguise as a standard action by taking a -5 penalty on his
check. He can take 10 on [Bluff] and [Disguise] checks and use
[Bluff] to create a diversion to hide as a swift action. He can
take 20 on a [Bluff] or [Disguise] check once per day, plus one
time per six levels beyond 5th. This ability replaces lore
master.


## Cleric

Clerics are messengers and servants of the gods, venturing forth
into the world to spread their patrons' gospel through
compassion, reason, bargaining, or righteous conquest. They are
the bearers of divine guidance—and divine wrath. From gentle and
penitent village priests to holy warriors and church heads whose
decrees can rock nations and foment upheaval across entire
worlds, clerics are everywhere, their callings and methods as
varied as the gods they serve. They are living proof of the gods'
power and interest in the world of mortals, and to deny them is
to invite destruction, both in this world and the next.

### Subdomains

Presented in the section below are new rules for subdomains—more
specific focuses for clerical worship and power that allow
players greater flexibility in customizing their
characters. Every domain has a number of subdomains associated
with it (see [Table: Subdomains] for a complete list). Each
subdomain replaces a granted power and a number of spells in the
domain's granted spell list. Spells marked with an asterisk (\*)
are detailed in Chapter 5 of this book. A cleric who chooses a
subdomain must have access to both the domain and its subdomain
from her deity. If a cleric selects a subdomain, she cannot
select its associated domain as her other domain choice (in
effect, the subdomain replaces its associated domain). Subdomains
are treated as equivalent to their associated domain for any
effect or prerequisite based on domains. If a subdomain has two
associated domains, the cleric can only select the subdomain for
one of her domains. Subdomains can be selected by Druids (except
the metal subdomain) and inquisitors (if their deity allows it).

If a subdomain ability calls for a saving throw, the DC of the
save is equal to 10 + 1/2 the character's cleric level + her
Wisdom modifier.

  Domain        Subdomains
  ------------- ---------------------------
  Air           Cloud, Wind
  Animal        Feather, Fur
  Artifice      Construct, Toil
  Chaos         Azata, Demon, Protean
  Charm         Love, Lust
  Community     Family, Home
  Darkness      Loss, Night
  Death         Murder, Undead
  Destruction   Catastrophe, Rage
  Earth         Caves, Metal
  Evil          Daemon, Demon, Devil
  Fire          Ash, Smoke
  Glory         Heroism, Honor
  Good          Agathion, Archon, Azata
  Healing       Restoration, Resurrection
  Knowledge     Memory, Thought
  Law           Archon, Devil, Inevitable
  Liberation    Freedom, Revolution
  Luck          Curse, Fate
  Madness       Insanity, Nightmare
  Magic         Arcane, Divine
  Nobility      Leadership, Martyr
  Plant         Decay, Growth
  Protection    Defense, Purity
  Repose        Ancestors, Souls
  Rune          Language, Wards
  Strength      Ferocity, Resolve
  Sun           Day, Light
  Travel        Exploration, Trade
  Trickery      Deception, Thievery
  War           Blood, Tactics
  Water         Ice, Oceans
  Weather       Seasons, Storms

  : Table: Subdomains

### Agathion Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Good.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
holy lance power of the Good domain. Agathions are a race of
neutral good outsiders.

*Protective Aura (Su)*: At 8th level, you can emit a 30-foot
protective aura as a standard action. Allies in this aura receive
a +2 deflection bonus to AC and a +2 resistance bonus on all
saving throws. In addition, allies in the area gain the benefits
of *[Protection from Evil]* (although the AC bonus and saving
throw bonus do not stack with those granted by this effect). You
can use this ability for a number of rounds per day equal to your
cleric level. These rounds do not have to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Shield of Faith]*,
3rd—*[Tongues]*, 6th—*[Planar Ally]*(agathions only).

### Ancestors Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Repose.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
ward against death power of the Repose domain.

*Speak With Dead (Su)*: At 8th level, as a standard action, you
can ask one question of a dead creature as if using *[Speak with
Dead]*. The dead creature you are questioning does not gain a
Will saving throw if your alignments are different. You can use
this ability a number of times per day equal to your cleric
level.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 4th—*[Rest Eternal]*\*,
6th—*[Geas/quest]*.

### Arcane Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Magic.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
hand of the acolyte power of the Magic domain.

*Arcane Beacon (Su)*: As a standard action you can become a
beacon of arcane energy until the end of your next turn. The aura
emanates 15 feet from you. All arcane spells cast within the aura
either gain a +1 bonus to their caster level or increase their
saving throw DC by +1. The caster chooses the benefit when she
casts the spell. You can use this ability a number of times per
day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st level—*[Magic Aura]*,
  4th—*[Arcane Eye]*, 6th—*[Analyze Dweomer]*.

### Archon Subdomain

**Associated Domains**: Good, Law.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
holy lance power of the Good domain or the staff of order power
of the Law domain. [Archons] are a race of lawful good outsiders.

*Aura of Menace (Su)*: At 8th level, you can emit a 30-foot aura
of menace as a standard action. Enemies in this aura take a -2
penalty to AC and on attacks and saves as long as they remain
inside the aura. You can use this ability for a number of rounds
per day equal to your cleric level. These rounds do not need to
be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Divine Favor]*,
3rd—*[Prayer]*, 6th—*[Planar Ally]*(archon only).

### Ash Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Fire.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
fire resistance power of the Fire domain.

*Wall of Ashes (Su)*: At 8th level, you can create a wall of
swirling ashes anywhere within 100 feet. This wall is up to 20
feet high and up to 10 feet long per cleric level you
possess. The wall of ash blocks line of sight, and any creature
passing through it must make a Fortitude save or be blinded for
1d4 rounds. The wall of ash reveals invisible creatures that are
inside it or adjacent to it, although they become invisible again
if they move away from the wall. You can use this ability for a
number of minutes per day equal to your cleric level, but these
minutes do not need to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 7th—*[Disintegrate]*, 9th—*[Fiery
Body]*\*.

### Azata Subdomain

**Associated Domains**: Chaos, Good.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
touch of chaos power of the Chaos domain or the touch of good
power of the Good domain. [Azatas] are a race of chaotic good
outsiders.

*Elysium's Call (Su)*: With a touch, you can imbue creatures with
the spirit of Elysium, lifting their spirits and freeing them
from bonds.  The creatures touched can immediately reroll any
failed saving throws against spells and spell-like abilities of
the enchantment (charm) and enchantment (compulsion)
subschools. In addition, targets receive a +2 sacred bonus on
such saving throws and a +2 sacred bonus on CMB checks to escape
a grapple. Finally, targets can ignore up to 5 feet of difficult
terrain each round, as if they had the [Nimble Moves] feat. These
bonuses last for a number of rounds equal to 1/2 your cleric
level (minimum 1), although the saving throw reroll only applies
when the creature is touched. You can use this ability for a
number of rounds per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Expeditious Retreat]*,
3rd—*[Fly]*, 6th—*[Planar Ally]*(azata only).

### Blood Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: War.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
weapon master power of the War domain.

*[Wounding] Blade (Su)*: At 8th level, you can give a weapon that
you touch the *[Wounding]* special weapon quality for a number of
rounds equal to 1/2 your cleric level. You can use this ability
once per day at 8th level, and an additional time per day for
every four levels beyond 8th.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 3rd—*[Vampiric Touch]*, 5th—*[Wall
of Thorns]*, 7th—*[Inflict Serious Wounds (Mass)]*.

### Catastrophe Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Destruction.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
destructive aura power of the Destruction domain.

*Deadly Weather (Su)*: At 8th level, you can unleash a furious
call to the heavens, summoning forth an ever-changing storm of
destruction for a number of rounds per day equal to your cleric
level. This storm has a radius of 5 feet per cleric level. Each
round, the storm has one of the following effects: driving rain
(-4 on all [Perception] checks and ranged attack rolls), howling
winds (-8 on [Fly] skill checks and ranged attack rolls), heavy
snow (all terrain is considered difficult), or lightning bolt (as
*[Call Lightning]*). Other effects depending on the weather might
also apply (at the GM's discretion). You choose which effect
takes place each round, but no effect may be repeated on the
following round. These rounds do not need to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Gust of Wind]*, 3rd—*[Call
Lightning]*, 7th—*[Control Weather].*

### Caves Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Earth.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
acid resistance power of the Earth domain.

*Tunnel Runner (Su)*: At 8th level, you can move through tunnels
and caves with ease. Activating this ability is a standard
action. You can move across any stone surface as if under the
effects of *[Spider Climb]*. You can also see very well in
darkness, gaining darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. If you
already possess darkvision, extend the range by 60 feet. While
underground, you also gain an insight bonus equal to your cleric
level on [Stealth] skill checks and an insight bonus equal to
your Wisdom modifier on initiative checks. You can use this
ability for 1 minute per day per cleric level you possess.  These
minutes do not need to be consecutive, but they must be spent in
1-minute increments.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Create Pit]\**, 3rd—*[Spiked
  Pit]*\*, 6th—*[Hungry Pit]\**.

### Cloud Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Air.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
electricity resistance power of the Air domain.

*Thundercloud (Su)*: At 8th level, you can, as a standard action,
summon a storm cloud. This power functions as *[Fog Cloud]*
except that creatures inside the cloud are deafened and take 2d6
points of electricity damage each round from the flashes of
thunder and lightning. Once created, you can concentrate on the
cloud to move it up to 30 feet each round. You can use this
ability for a number of rounds per day equal to your cleric
level. These rounds do not need to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 4th—*[Solid Fog]*, 9th—*[Storm of
  Vengeance]*.

### Construct Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Artifice.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
dancing weapon power of the Artifice domain.

*Animate Servant (Su)*: At 8th level, as a standard action, you
can give life to inanimate objects. This ability functions as
*[Animate Objects]* using your cleric level as the caster
level. You can use this ability once per day at 8th level, and
one additional time per day for every four levels beyond 8th.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 7th—*[Limited Wish]*,
  8th—*[Polymorph Any Object]*.

### Curse Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Luck.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
bit of luck power of the Luck domain.

*Malign Eye (Su)*: As a standard action, you can afflict one
target within 30 feet with your malign eye, causing it to take a
-2 penalty on all saving throws against your spells. The effect
lasts for 1 minute or until the target hits you with an
attack. You can use this ability for a number of times per day
equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st level—*[Bane]*, 3rd—*[Bestow
Curse]*, 6th—*[Eyebite].*

### Daemon Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Evil.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
scythe of evil power of the Evil domain. Daemons are a race of
neutral evil outsiders.

*Whispering Evil (Su)*: At 8th level, as a standard action, you
can whisper a hypnotizing litany of empty promises. Each enemy
within a 30-foot emanation that can hear you must succeed on a
Will saving throw or become fascinated for as long as you
continue the litany. You can use this power a number of rounds
per day equal to your cleric level, but these rounds do not need
to be consecutive. This is a mind-affecting effect.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Cause Fear]*, 3rd—*[Vampiric
Touch]*, 6th—*[Planar Binding]*(daemons only).

### Day Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Sun.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
nimbus of light power of the Sun domain.

*Day's Resurgence (Su)*: At 8th level, you can restore a single
creature as if it had just completed 8 hours of rest. It takes 10
minutes to use this power. If the use of this power is disrupted,
it must be restarted, but it is not lost. At the end of the 10
minutes, a single willing creature that you have touched regains
hit points as if it had rested for the night and may make new
saving throws against effects that require a save once per
day. The target does not suffer any negative effects if such
saving throws are failed, but success counts toward removing the
affliction (if possible). This ability does not allow a target to
prepare spells an additional time per day. You can use this
ability once per day at 8th level, plus one additional time per
day for every 2 levels beyond 8th.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd level—*[Continual Flame]*,
3rd—*[Daylight].*

### Decay Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Plant.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
bramble armor power of the Plant domain.

*Aura of Decay (Su)*: At 8th level, you can emit a 30-foot aura
of decay as a standard action. Living creatures in this aura
(except you) take 1d6 points of damage per round as their flesh
rots. They also take a cumulative -1 penalty to Strength each
round they remain in the aura.  Once outside the aura, the
penalty fades at the rate of -1 per round, but it begins building
again if they reenter the aura. Plant creatures take 2d6 points
of damage per round. You can use this ability for a number of
rounds per day equal to your cleric level. These rounds do not
need to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 3rd—*[Contagion]*, 4th—*[Poison]*,
6th—*[Harm].*

### Deception Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Trickery.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
copycat power of the Trickery domain.

*Sudden Shift (Sp)*: In the blink of an eye, you can appear
somewhere else. As an immediate action, after you are missed by a
melee attack, you can teleport up to 10 feet to a space that you
can see. This space must be inside the reach of the creature that
attacked you. You can use this power a number of times each day
equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Mirror Image]*,
  7th—*[Project Image]*.

### Defense Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Protection.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
resistant touch power of the Protection domain.

*[Deflection] Aura (Su)*: Once each day, you can emit a 20-foot
aura for a number of rounds equal to your cleric level. Allies
within the aura gain a +2 deflection bonus to AC and combat
maneuver defense.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Shield]*, 2nd—*[Barkskin]*,
7th—*[Deflection]*\**.*

### Demon Subdomain

**Associated Domains**: Chaos, Evil.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
touch of chaos power of the Chaos domain or the touch of evil
power of the Evil domain. [Demons] are a race of chaotic evil
outsiders.

*Fury of the Abyss (Su)*: As a swift action, you can give
yourself an enhancement bonus equal to 1/2 your cleric level
(minimum +1) on melee attacks, melee damage rolls, and combat
maneuver checks. This bonus lasts for 1 round. During this round,
you take a -2 penalty to AC. You can use this ability for a
number of times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Doom]*, 3rd—*[Rage]*,
6th—*[Planar Binding]*(demons only).

### Devil Subdomain

**Associated Domains**: Evil, Law.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
touch of evil power of the Evil domain or the touch of law power
of the Law domain. [Devils] are a race of lawful evil outsiders.

*Hell's Corruption (Su)*: You can cause a creature to become more
susceptible to corruption as a melee touch attack. Creatures
touched take a -2 penalty on all saving throws and must roll all
opposed skill checks twice, taking the worse result. This effect
lasts for a number of rounds equal to 1/2 your cleric level
(minimum 1). You can use this ability for a number of times per
day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Command]*,
3rd—*[Suggestion]*, 6th—*[Planar Binding]*(devils only).

### Divine Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Magic.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
hand of the acolyte power of the Magic domain.

*Divine Vessel (Su)*: Whenever you are the target of a divine
spell, you can, as a swift action, grant each ally within 15 feet
of you a divine boon. This boon grants a +2 bonus on the next
attack roll, skill check, or ability check made before the end of
their next turn. You can use this ability a number of times per
day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd level—*[Bless Water]*,
5th—*[Cleanse]\**, 7th—*[Resurrection]*, 9th*—[Miracle].*

### Exploration Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Travel.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
agile feet power of the Travel domain.

*Door Sight (Su)*: You can lay your hand upon any surface and see
what is on the other side, as if using *clairvoyance*. Using this
power takes 1 minute, during which time you must be touching the
surface you want to see through. You can keep looking for as long
as 10 minutes with each use of this power, but must touch the
surface and take no other action the entire time. The surface
cannot be thicker than 6 inches plus 1 inch per cleric level you
possess. You can use this power a number of times per day equal
to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Expeditious Retreat]*,
4th—*[Locate Creature]*, 9th—*[World Wave]\*.*

### Family Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Community.

**Replacement Power**: The following power replaces the calming
touch power of the Community domain.

*[Binding] Ties (Su)*: As a standard action, you can touch an
ally and remove one condition affecting the ally by transferring
it to yourself. This transfer lasts a number of rounds equal to
your cleric level, but you can end it as a free action on your
turn. At the end of this effect, the condition reverts to the
original creature, unless it has ended or is removed by another
effect.  While this power is in use, the target is immune to the
transferred condition. You can use this ability a number of times
per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Calm Emotions]*,
3rd—*[Create Food and Water]*.

### Fate Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Luck.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
good fortune power of the Luck domain.

*Tugging Strands (Su)*: At 8th level, you can force a creature
within line of sight to reroll any one roll that it has just made
before the result of the roll is revealed. The result of the
reroll must be taken, even if it is worse than the original
roll. You can use this ability once per day at 8th level, and one
additional time per day for every 6 levels beyond 8th.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Augury]*, 3rd—*[Borrow
Fortune]*\*.

### Feather Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Animal.

Add [Fly] to your list of class skills. In addition, whenever you
cast a spell that grants you a fly speed, your maneuverability
increases by one step (up to perfect).

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
speak with animals power of the Animal domain.

*Eyes of the Hawk (Ex)*: You gain a racial bonus on [Perception]
checks equal to 1/2 your cleric level (minimum +1). In addition,
if you can act during a surprise round, you receive a +2 racial
bonus on your Initiative check.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[feather fall]*, 3rd—*[Fly]*,
6th—*[Fly (Mass)]\**.

### Ferocity Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Strength.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
strength surge power of the Strength domain.

*Ferocious Strike (Su)*: Whenever you make a melee attack, you
can designate that attack as a ferocious strike. If the attack
hits, it deals additional damage equal to 1/2 your cleric level
(minimum +1). You can use this ability a number of times per day
equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 3rd—*[Rage]*, 6th—*[Bull's
Strength (Mass)].*

### Freedom Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Liberation.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
liberation power of the Liberation domain.

*Liberty's Blessing (Sp)*: You touch a willing creature as a
standard action, granting it a boon. A creature with this boon
can, as a swift action, make a saving throw against a single
spell or effect it is suffering from that grants a save. The DC
of the saving throw is equal to the original DC of the spell or
effect. If the saving throw is successful, the effect ends. This
boon lasts for 1 minute or until successfully used to remove a
spell or effect, whichever duration is shorter. You can use this
ability for a number of times equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Sanctuary]*, 5th—*[Plane
Shift]*.

### Fur Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Animal.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
speak with animals power of the Animal domain.

*Predator's [Grace] (Su)*: You can, as a swift action, grant
yourself a +10-foot bonus to your base speed for 1 round. This
bonus increases by 5 feet for every 5 cleric levels you
possess. In addition, you gain low-light vision for 1 round. If
you already possess low-light vision, the range of your sight
becomes three times that of a human in dim light for 1 round. You
can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your
Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Magic Fang]*, 3rd—*[Beast
  Shape I]*(animals only).

### Growth Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Plant.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
wooden fist power of the Plant domain.

*Enlarge (Su)*: As a swift action you can enlarge yourself for 1
round, as if you were the target of the *[Enlarge Person]*
spell. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal
to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Enlarge Person]*,
5th—*[Righteous Might].*

### Heroism Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Glory.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
divine presence power of the Glory domain.

*Aura of [Heroism] (Su)*: At 8th level, you can emit a 30-foot
aura of heroism for a number of rounds per day equal to your
cleric level. Using this ability is a swift action.  Allies in
the area are treated as if they were under the effects of
*[Heroism]*. These rounds do not need to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 3rd—*[Heroism]*, 6th—*[Heroism
(Greater)]*.

### Home Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Community.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
unity power of the Community domain.

*Guarded Hearth (Su)*: At 8th level, you can create a ward that
protects a specified area. Creating this ward takes 10 minutes of
uninterrupted work. This ward has a maximum radius of 5 feet per
2 cleric levels you possess. When the ward is completed, you
designate any number of creatures inside its area. Should any
other creature enter the warded area, all of the selected
creatures are immediately alerted (and awoken if they were
asleep). The designated creatures also receive a sacred bonus
equal to your Wisdom modifier on all saving throws and attack
rolls while inside the warded area. This ward immediately ends if
you leave the area. The ward lasts for 1 hour per cleric
level. You can use this ability once per day.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Alarm]*, 3rd—*[Glyph of
Warding]*, 7th—*[Guards and Wards]*.

### Honor Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Glory.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
touch of glory power of the Glory domain.

*Honor Bound (Su)*: With a touch, you can remind a creature of
its duties and responsibilities, granting it a new saving throw
against each enchantment (charm) or enchantment (compulsion)
effect that currently affects it. If the saving throw is
successful, the enchantment effect is ended. This power only
affects effects that allow a save. If you fail a save against
such an effect, you can use this ability as an immediate action
to grant yourself an additional save. Once the target (either you
or a touched creature) has made one additional save per effect,
this ability has no further effect on that particular enchantment
effect. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal
to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Zone of Truth]*,
6th—*[Geas/quest].*

### Ice Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Water.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
cold resistance power of the Water domain.

*Body of Ice (Su)*: At 8th level, you can transmute your body and
equipment to ice for a period of time. It takes a standard action
to take on the form of ice, and you can end the transmutation
with a free action on your turn. When you take on the form of
ice, you are immune to cold and have DR 5/—, but you take twice
the normal amount of damage from fire. You can take on the form
of ice for a number of rounds per day equal to your cleric
level. The rounds need not be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 7th—*[Freezing Sphere]*,
  9th—*[Polar Ray]*.

### Inevitable Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Law.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
touch of law power of the Law domain. Inevitables are a race of
lawful neutral outsiders.

*[Command] (Su)*: As a standard action, you can give a creature
an emotionless yet undeniable order, as per the spell
*[Command]*. A Will save negates this effect. You cannot target a
creature more than once per day with this ability. You can use
this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom
modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 3rd—*[Command Undead]*,
5th—*[Command (Greater)]*, 6th—*[Planar Binding]* (inevitables
only).

### Insanity Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Madness.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
visions of madness power of the Madness domain.

*Insane Focus (Su)*: You can touch a willing creature as a
standard action, granting it a +4 bonus on all saving throws made
against mind-affecting effects and immunity to confusion. This
bonus lasts for 1 minute. If the creature fails a saving throw
against a mind-affecting effect during this period, it loses its
immunity to confusion and is immediately confused for one
round. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal
to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 4th—*[Moonstruck]*\*,
6th—*[Phantasmal Web]*\**.*

### Language Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Rune.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
spell rune power of the Rune domain.

*Rune Shift (Su)*: At 6th level, as a swift action, you can
change the location of one of your blast runes. The rune must be
within 30 feet.  You can place the blast rune in any square
adjacent to you, including one occupied by another creature.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Comprehend Languages]*,
2nd—*[Share Language]*\*, 3rd—*[Tongues]*, 5th*—[Telepathic
Bond].*

### Leadership Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Nobility.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
inspiring word power of the Nobility domain.

*Inspiring [Command] (Su)*: As a standard action, you can issue
an inspiring command to your allies. The inspiring command
affects one ally plus one additional ally for every three cleric
levels you possess, who must all be within 30 feet of you.
Affected allies gain a +2 insight bonus on attack rolls, AC,
combat maneuver defense, and skill checks for 1 round. This is a
language-dependant mind-affecting effect.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st level—*[Bless]*,
3rd—*[Prayer]*, 6th—*[Brilliant Inspiration]*\**.*

### Light Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Sun.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
sun's blessing power of the Sun domain.

*[Blinding] Flash (Su)*: As a standard action, you can emit a
flash of light from your holy symbol or divine focus. The most
powerful light emanates out 20 feet from you.  Creatures with
fewer Hit Dice than your cleric level within this area are
blinded for 1d4 rounds unless they succeed at a Fortitude
save. All creatures in this area are dazzled for a number of
rounds equal to 1/2 your cleric level (minimum 1). You can use
this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom
modifier

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Faerie Fire]*,
3rd—*[Daylight].*

### Loss Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Darkness.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
eyes of darkness power of the Darkness domain.

*Aura of Forgetfulness (Su)*: At 8th level, you can emit a
30-foot aura of forgetfulness for a number of rounds per day
equal to your cleric level. Creatures you target in this area
must make a Will save or have no memory of any time spent inside
the area. In addition, spellcasters in the area lose one prepared
spell or available spell slot per round spent in the area,
starting with 1st-level spells and going up through higher-level
spells. Spellcasters are allowed a save each round to negate this
loss (this save is separate from the memory loss save).  These
rounds do not need to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 5th—*[Enervation]*, 6th—*[Modify
Memory]*, 9th—*[Energy Drain]*.

### Love Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Charm.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
dazing touch power of the Charm domain.

*Adoration (Su)*: As an immediate action, you can attempt to
thwart a melee or ranged attack that targets you. This ability
functions as *[Sanctuary]*, but only against one individual
attack. You must use the ability after the attack is declared but
before the roll is made. The creature attacking you receives a
Will save to negate this effect. If a creature has more than one
attack, this ability only affects one of the attacks. You can use
the ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom
modifier.  This is a mind-affecting effect.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Enthrall]*, 8th—*[Euphoric
Tranquility]*\*.

### Lust Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Charm.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
charming smile power of the Charm domain.

*Anything to Please (Su)*: At 8th level, you can compel a
creature within 30 feet to attempt to please you as a standard
action. The creature receives a Will save to negate this
affect. If the save fails, the creature attacks your enemies for
1 round, gives you its most valuable item, or drops prone at your
feet and grovels for 1d4 rounds (GM's choice). You can use this
ability once per day at 8th level and one additional time per day
for every four levels beyond 8th. This is a mind-affecting
effect.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Touch of Idiocy]*,
4th—*[Confusion]*.

### Martyr Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Nobility.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
leadership power of the Nobility domain.

*Sacrificial Bond (Su)*: At 8th level, when an ally within 30
feet takes damage from an attack, you can, as an immediate
action, transfer this damage to yourself. This power also
transfers any effects that accompany the damage. The damage done
to you cannot be reduced in any way. You can use this ability
once per day at 8th level, plus on additional time per day at
14th level and 20th level.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Shield Other]*,
  6th—*[Sacrificial Oath]\*.*

### Memory Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: [Knowledge].

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
lore keeper power of the [Knowledge] domain.

*Recall (Su)*: With a touch, you can cause a creature to recall
some bit of forgotten lore or information. The creature can retry
any [Knowledge] skill check it has made within the past minute,
gaining a insight bonus on the check equal to your Wisdom
modifier. You can use this ability a number times per day equal
to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[memory lapse]\**,
  6th—*[modify memory]*, 8th—*[moment of prescience]*.

### Metal Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Earth.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
acid dart power of the Earth domain.

*Metal Fist (Su)*: As a swift action, you can turn your fists
into metal for 1 round, allowing you to make unarmed strikes that
deal 1d6 points of bludgeoning damage plus your Strength
modifier. These unarmed strikes do not provoke attacks of
opportunity, but attacking with both uses the two-weapon fighting
rules as normal. In addition, these unarmed strikes ignore the
hardness of items with a hardness of 10 or less. You can use this
ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom
modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[heat metal]*, 6th—*[wall of
  iron]*, 8th—*[iron body].*

### Murder Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Death.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
death's embrace power of the Death domain.

*Killing Blow (Su)*: At 8th level, weapons you use become infused
with the power of death. Whenever you confirm a critical hit with
a melee or ranged weapon, your attack deals an additional amount
of bleed damage equal to half your cleric level. You can use this
ability once per day at 8th level, plus one additional time per
day for every four levels beyond 8th.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 3rd—*[keen edge]*,
5th—*[suffocation]*\*, 9th—*[suffocation (mass)]\**.

### Night Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Darkness.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
touch of darkness power of the Darkness domain.

*Night Hunter (Su)*: As a standard action, you can blend into the
shadows of the night, becoming nearly invisible*.* As long as you
are in an area of dim light or darkness, you are invisible (as
per *[invisibility]*) to creatures without darkvision. This
ability lasts for a number of rounds equal to 1/2 your cleric
level (minimum 1). You can use this ability for a number of times
per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[sleep]*, 6th—*[nightmare].*

### Nightmare Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Madness.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
vision of madness power of the Madness domain.

*Fearful Touch (Su)*: As a standard action, you can make a melee
touch attack against a creature, causing it to experience
terrible hallucinations for 1 round. During this time, the
creature loses any immunity to fear effects it might possess and
takes a -2 penalty on attack rolls made against you. In addition,
the creature takes a penalty on Will saves made against fear
effects equal to 1/2 your cleric level (minimum -1). This power
is a mind-affecting effect. You can use this ability for a number
of times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 4th—*[phantasmal killer]*,
6th—*[cloak of dreams]\**, 9th—*[weird].*

### Oceans Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Water.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
icicle power of the Water domain.

*Surge (Su)*: As a standard action, you can cause a mighty wave
to appear that pushes or pulls a single creature. Make a combat
maneuver check against the target, using your cleric level + your
Wisdom modifier as your CMB. If successful, you may pull or push
the creature as if using the bull rush or drag combat
maneuver. You can use this ability a number of times per day
equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[slipstream]\**, 3rd—*[water
walk].*

### Protean Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Chaos.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
chaos blade power of the Chaos domain. Proteans are a race of
chaotic neutral outsiders.

*Aura of Chaos (Su)*: At 8th level, you can surround yourself
with a field wild energies. Thee energies manifest as a 30-foot
aura of chaos for a number of rounds per day equal to your cleric
level. All enemies within this aura must declare one type of
action at the start of their turn (attack, cast a spell, move,
use an item, or activate a special ability) and make a Will
save. Creatures that fail the Will save must take an action other
than their declared action. If they succeed, they must take the
declared action. Creatures cannot select actions that they cannot
perform.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[confusion (lesser)]*,
3rd—*[displacement]*, 6th—*[planar binding]*(proteans only).

### Purity Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Protection.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
aura of protection power of the Protection domain.

*Purifying Touch (Su)*: At 8th level, you can touch a willing
creature with divine power, giving it a saving throw against each
effect currently affecting it, using the original saving throw DC
of the effect. Each successful saving throw ends the related
effect. The creature can choose not to make a save against an
effect. You can use this ability once per day at 8th level, plus
one additional time per day at 14th and 20th level.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[protection from
chaos]/evil/good/law*, 3rd—*[remove blindness/deafness]*,
5th—*[atonement]*.

### Rage Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Destruction.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
destructive aura power of the Destruction domain.

*[Rage] (Su)*: At 8th level, you can enter a fearsome rage, like
a barbarian, for a number of rounds per day equal to your cleric
level. At 12th and 16th level, you can select one rage power. You
cannot select any rage power that possesses a level requirement,
but otherwise your barbarian level is equal to 1/2 your cleric
level. These rounds of rage stack with any rounds of rage you
might have from levels of barbarian.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[bull's strength]*,
6th—*[moonstruck]\**.

### Resolve Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Strength.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
might of the gods power of the Strength domain.

*Bestow Resolve (Su)*: At 8th level, you can bless creatures with
the boldness of your deity. You can bestow a number of temporary
hit points equal to your level + your Wisdom modifier to all
allies within 20 feet.  The temporary hit points remain for 1
minute. You can use this ability once per day at 8th level, plus
one additional time per day for every 4 levels you possess beyond
8th.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[bless]*, 6th—*[heroes'
feast].*

### Restoration Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Healing.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
rebuke death power of the Healing domain.

*Restorative Touch (Su)*: You can touch a creature, letting the
healing power of your deity flow through you to relieve the
creature of a minor condition. Your touch can remove the dazed,
fatigued, shaken, sickened, or staggered condition. You choose
which condition is removed. You can use this ability a number of
times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[remove disease]*,
4th—*[neutralize poison]*, 5th—*[break enchantment]*.

### Resurrection Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Healing.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
healer's blessing power of the Healing domain.

*Gift of Life (Su)*: At 8th level, you can touch a creature that
has died within the past minute to grant it a few moments of
life. The dead creature returns to life for a number of rounds
equal to your cleric level. Creatures returned to life in this
way have a number of hit points equal to half your cleric level,
and continue to be affected by any still-active spells,
conditions, or afflictions present at the time of their death. At
the end of this time, the creature dies again. The creature is
free to act as it sees fit during this time. You are granted no
control over it. You can use this power once per day at 8th
level, plus one additional time per day for every four levels
beyond 8th.

**ReplacemEnt Domain Spells**: 5th—*[Raise Dead]*,
7th—*[Resurrection]*, 9th—*[True Resurrection]*.

### Revolution Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Liberation.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
freedom's call power of the Liberation domain.

*Powerful Persuader (Su)*: At 8th level, when you make a
[Diplomacy] or [Intimidate] check, you can roll twice and take
the higher result. Using this ability is a free action. You can
use this ability once per day at 8th level, plus one additional
time per day for every 2 levels beyond 8th.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Enthrall]*, 6th—*[Symbol of
Persuasion].*

### Seasons Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Weather.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
storm burst power of the Weather domain.

*Untouched by the Seasons (Su)*: By touching a creature, you can
grant it the benefits of *[Endure Elements]*, which last for 1
hour per cleric level. You can use this ability a number of times
per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Goodberry]*, 4th—*[Blight]*,
8th—*[Sunburst].*

### Smoke Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Fire.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
fire bolt power of the Fire domain.

*Cloud of Smoke (Su)*: As a standard action, you can create a
5-foot-radius cloud of smoke. This power has a range of 30 feet.
Creatures inside the cloud take a -2 penalty on attack rolls and
[Perception] skill checks for as long as they remain inside and
for 1 round after exiting the cloud.  Creatures inside the cloud
gain concealment from attacks made by opponents that are not
adjacent to them. You can use this ability a number of times per
day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Pyrotechnics]*,
3rd—*[Stinking Cloud]*.

### Souls Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Repose.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
gentle rest power of the Repose domain.

*Touch the Spirit World (Su)*: With a touch, you can empower a
weapon to affect incorporeal creatures. The weapon touched deals
half damage to incorporeal creatures, or full damage if it is a
magic weapon. This benefit lasts for a number of rounds equal to
your cleric level. You can use this ability a number of times per
day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 3rd—*[Animate Dead]*,
6th—*antilife [Shield],*9th—*[Trap the Soul].*

### Storms Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Weather.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
lightning lord power of the Weather domain.

*Gale Aura (Su)*: At 6th level, as a standard action, you can
create a 30-foot aura of gale-like winds that slows the progress
of enemies.  Creatures in the aura cannot take a 5-foot
step. Enemies in the aura treat each square that brings them
closer to you as difficult terrain.  They can move normally in
any other direction. You can use this ability for a number of
rounds per day equal to your cleric level. The rounds do not need
to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 5th—*[Call Lightning Storm]*,
6th—*[Sirocco]\*.*

### Tactics Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: War.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
battle rage power of the War domain.

*Seize the Initiative (Su)*: Whenever you and your allies roll
for initiative, you can grant one ally within 30 feet the ability
to roll twice and take either result. This decision is made
before results are revealed. You can use this ability a number of
times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Aid]*, 5th—*[Command
(Greater)]*, 8th—*[Planar Ally (Greater)]*.

### Thievery Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Trickery.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
master's illusions power of the Trickery domain.

*Thief of the Gods (Su)*: At 8th level, when you make a [Disable
Device] or [Sleight of Hand] check, you can roll twice and take
the higher result. Using this ability is a free action. You can
use this ability once per day at 8th level, plus one additional
time per day for every 2 levels beyond 8th.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 3rd—*[Locate Object]*,
  7th—*[Ethereal Jaunt]*.

### Thought Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: [Knowledge].

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
remote viewing power of the [Knowledge] domain.

*Read Minds (Su)*: At 8th level, you can broaden your mental
spectrum to encompass those around you. Doing so allows you to
read the mind of every creature within 30 feet as if you had cast
*[Detect Thoughts]*. This ability allows you to read the surface
thoughts of any creature that you are aware of after only 1 round
of concentration. Creatures in this area are allowed a Will save
to negate the effect. The DC of this Will save is 10 + 1/2 your
cleric level + your Wisdom modifier. You can use this ability for
a number of rounds per day equal to your cleric level. These
rounds do not need to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 3rd—*[Seek Thoughts]\**,
5th—*[Telepathic Bond]*, 8th—*[Mind Blank]*.

### Toil Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Artifice.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
dancing weapon power of the Artifice domain.

*Aura of Repetition (Su)*: At 8th level, you can emit a 30-foot
aura of repetition for a number of rounds per day equal to your
cleric level.  All enemies within this aura must make a Will save
each round or repeat their action from the previous round (if
possible). Creatures that attacked on the previous round attack
again on the following round, although they may change their
target. Creatures that moved the previous round must take the
same move action again, although they may change their
route. Creatures that drank a potion must do so again, even they
can only drink from an empty bottle. Actions that cannot be
repeated are wasted. These rounds do not need to be consecutive.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Command]*, 5th—*[Waves of
Fatigue]*, 7th—*[Waves of Exhaustion]*.

### Trade Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Travel.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
agile feet power of the Travel domain.

*Silver-Tongued Haggler (Su)*: Whenever you make a [Bluff],
[Diplomacy], or [Sense Motive] check, you can, as a free action,
grant yourself a bonus on the roll equal to 1/2 your cleric level
(minimum +1). You can use this ability a number of times per day
equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Floating Disk]*,
5th—*[Overland Flight]*, 9th—*[Gate].*

### Undead Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Death.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
bleeding touch power of the Death domain.

*Death's Kiss (Su)*: You can cause a creature to take on some of
the traits of the undead with a melee touch attack. Touched
creatures are treated as undead for the purposes of effects that
heal or cause damage based on positive and negative energy. This
effect lasts for a number of rounds equal to 1/2 your cleric
level (minimum 1). It does not apply to the [Turn Undead] or
[Command Undead] feats. You can use this ability a number of
times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom modifier.

**RepLacement Domain Spells**: 2nd—*[Ghoul Touch]*,
4th—*[Enervation]*, 9th—*[Energy Drain]*.

### Wards Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Rune.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
spell rune power of the Rune domain.

*Warding Rune (Su)*: At 6th level, when a creature is damaged by
your blast rune, it cannot attack you for a number of rounds
equal to 1/2 your cleric level unless it succeeds at a Will save,
as per the spell *[Sanctuary]*. Using this ability is an
immediate action when a creature triggers one of your blast
runes. The ability does not prevent you from being attacked or
affected by area of effect spells or abilities. You can use this
ability once per day at 8th level, plus one additional time per
day at 14th level and 20th level.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st level—*[Arcane Lock]*,
4th—*[Dimensional Anchor]*, 6th—*[Guards and Wards].*

### Wind Subdomain

**Associated Domain**: Air.

**Replacement Power**: The following granted power replaces the
lightning arc power of the Air domain.

*Wind Blast (Su)*: As a standard action, you can unleash a blast
of air in a 30-foot line. Make a combat maneuver check against
each creature in the line, using your caster level as your base
attack bonus and your Wisdom modifier in place of your Strength
modifier. Treat the results as a bull rush attempt. You can use
this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Wisdom
modifier.

**Replacement Domain Spells**: 1st—*[Whispering Wind]*,
  6th—*[Wind Walk],*9th—*[Winds of Vengeance]\**.


## Druid

Druids are the keepers of the wildlands, the guardians watching
at nature's border to ensure that hubristic civilization does not
overreach its bounds. From the highest mountain peaks to the
steaming jungles and seas, druids learn and draw their power from
their surrounding environment and the creatures that live
there. Like nature itself, druids can be gentle and succoring or
red in tooth and claw, and need answer only to the wind and the
rain.

Presented below are new variant class rules to help you customize
your druid for specific terrain types, as well as rules for
druidic shamans who worship specific totem animals.

### Aquatic Druid

Shepherds of the lakes and seas, aquatic druids guard ecosystems
ranging from shallows streams to deep ocean trenches, ministering
to their residents and communing with the tides.

**Wild Empathy (Ex)**: An aquatic druid's wild empathy functions
only on creatures that have a swim speed or the aquatic or water
subtype; however, she can improve the attitude of any such
creature with Intelligence 2 or less regardless of type,
including mindless creatures.

**Aquatic Adaptation (Ex)**: At 2nd level, an aquatic druid gains
an insight bonus on Initiative checks and [Knowledge]
(geography), [Perception], [Stealth], [Survival], and [Swim]
checks equal to 1/2 her druid level in aquatic terrain, and she
cannot be tracked such environments. This ability replaces
woodland stride.

**Natural Swimmer (Ex)**: At 3rd level, an aquatic druid gains a
swim speed equal to half her land speed. This ability replaces
trackless step.

**Resist Ocean's Fury (Ex)**: At 4th level, an aquatic druid
gains a +4 bonus on saving throws against spells of the water
type or the exceptional or supernatural abilities of creatures
with the aquatic or water subtype. This ability replaces resist
nature's lure.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: An aquatic druid gains this ability at 6th
level, except that her effective druid level for the ability is
equal to her druid level - 2.

**Seaborn (Ex)**: At 9th level, an aquatic druid gains the
aquatic subtype, the amphibious trait, and a swim speed equal to
her land speed.  She also can endure cold climate effects as if
using *[Endure Elements]*. This ability replaces venom immunity.

**Deep Diver (Ex)**: At 13th level, an aquatic druid gains
DR/slashing or piercing equal to 1/2 her level. This damage
reduction also applies against spells and spell-like abilities
that inflict damage by grappling or crushing (e.g., *[Black
Tentacles]*, *[Crushing Hand]*). She never takes pressure damage
from deep water. This ability replaces a thousand faces.

### Arctic Druid

An arctic druid watches over the stark landscape of the far
frozen reaches of the world, tending the stunted and rugged life
that ekes out its survival in the least habitable climes.

**Arctic Native (Ex)**: At 2nd level, an arctic druid gains a
bonus on Initiative checks and [Knowledge] (geography),
[Perception], [Stealth], and [Survival] checks equal to 1/2 her
druid level in cold or icy terrain, and she cannot be tracked in
cold or icy terrain. This ability replaces woodland stride.

**Icewalking (Ex)**: At 3rd level, an arctic druid suffers no
penalty to speed or on [Acrobatics], [Climb], or [Stealth] checks
in snowy or icy terrain or weather conditions and can walk across
snow crusts or thin ice without breaking through. This ability
replaces trackless step.

**Arctic Endurance (Ex)**: At 4th level, an arctic druid ignores
the effects of a cold climate as if using *[Endure
Elements]*. She is also immune to being dazzled. This ability
replaces resist nature's lure.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: An arctic druid gains this ability at 6th
level, except that her effective druid level for this ability is
equal to her druid level - 2.

**Snowcaster (Su)**: At 9th level, an arctic druid can see
normally in [Ice Storm]*, *[Sleet Storm]*, or similar natural
snowstorms. In addition, she can prepare any druid spell with
the fire subtype as a cold spell, with an identical effect but
inflicting cold damage instead of fire damage. This ability
replaces venom immunity.

**Flurry Form (Ex)**: At 13th level, an arctic druid can assume
the form of a swirling column of snow equivalent to *[Gaseous
Form]* at will. While in this form, she gains a circumstance
bonus on [Stealth] checks made in cold terrain equal to her druid
level. This ability replaces a thousand faces.

### Blight Druid

The devoted servants of nature corrupted, ruined, and destroyed,
blight druids are the caretakers of lands ravaged by natural
disaster. While some are devoted to reforming and reclaiming
lands despoiled by the ravages of civilization, others seek out
the more rapacious violence inherent in nature and feed the
creeping rot and decay that brings an end to all things.

**Nature Bond (Ex)**: A blight druid may not bond with an animal
companion, but may either call a familiar as a wizard of her
druid level or select from the Darkness, Death, and Destruction
domains in addition to those normally available.

**Vermin Empathy (Su)**: A blight druid can improve the attitude
of vermin as a normal druid can with animals. Vermin have a
starting attitude of unfriendly. The blight druid can also
improve the attitude of animals and mindless undead creatures
that were formerly animals, but she takes a -4 penalty on the
check unless the animal or undead has a disease special
attack. This ability replaces wild empathy.

**Miasma (Ex)**: Starting at 5th level, if a blight druid is
adjacent to a creature at the beginning of its turn, the creature
must succeed at a Fortitude save with a DC of 10 + 1/2 the
druid's level + the druid's Wisdom modifier or become sickened
for 1 round. A creature of the animal, fey, or plant type that
fails its save is nauseated for 1 round and sickened for 1 minute
thereafter. If the creature makes its save, it is immune to this
effect for 24 hours, as are creatures immune to disease. This
ability replaces trackless step and resist nature's lure.

**Blightblooded (Ex)**: At 9th level, a blight druid gains
immunity to all diseases, including natural and supernatural
diseases. She also becomes immune to effects that would cause her
to become sickened or nauseated. This ability replaces venom
immunity.

**Plaguebearer (Su)**: Starting at 13th level, any creature that
strikes a blight druid with a touch attack, unarmed strike, or
natural weapon must succeed at a Fortitude save with a DC of 10 +
1/2 the druid's level + the druid's Wisdom modifier or contract a
disease, as the *[Contagion]* spell. If the creature makes its
save, it is immune to this effect for 24 hours. This ability
replaces a thousand faces.

### Cave Druid

Far from the green fields of the world above lies a lightless
expanse beneath the surface. This darkling fairyland is not
without beauty and natural wonders of its own, and a few druids
seek to preserve this hidden realm and purge it of the fell
horrors that creep up from below.

**Cavesense (Ex)**: A underground druid adds [Knowledge]
(dungeoneering) rather than [Knowledge] (geography) as a class
skill and gains a +2 bonus on [Knowledge] (dungeoneering) and
[Survival] skill checks. This ability replaces the nature sense
ability.

**Nature Bond**: A cave druid may select the Darkness domain in
addition to the choices normally allowed, but may not select the
Air or Weather domains.

**Wild Empathy (Ex)**: A cave druid can influence oozes, rather
than magical beasts, with a -4 penalty on her wild empathy check.

**Tunnelrunner (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a cave druid can move
through areas of rubble or narrow passages that require squeezing
at her normal movement rate and without penalty. This ability
replaces woodland stride.

**Lightfoot (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a cave druid cannot be detected
with tremorsense. This ability replaces trackless step.

**Resist Subterranean Corruption (Ex)**: At 4th level, a cave
druid gains a +2 bonus on saves against exceptional,
supernatural, and spell-like abilities of oozes and
aberrations. This ability replaces resist nature's lure.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: A cave druid gains this ability at 6th
level, except that her effective druid level for this ability is
equal to her druid level - 2. She cannot use wild shape to adopt
a plant form. At 10th level, the cave druid can assume the form
of a Small or Medium ooze as if using *[Beast Shape III]*, and at
12th level that of a Tiny or Large ooze as if using *[Beast Shape
IV]*(treating the ooze as if it were a magical beast without a
natural armor bonus). When in ooze form, the cave druid has no
discernible anatomy and is immune to poison, sneak attacks, and
critical hits.

### Desert Druid

Not all climates are verdant paradises, but even in the sere
deserts there is life—though often hidden from the sun and rarely
friendly—and raw, desolate beauty. Here desert druids come to pay
homage, protect and maintain the few habitable locales, and
witness nature's majesty in all its burning, merciless glory.

**Desert Native (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a desert druid gains a
bonus on Initiative checks and [Knowledge] (geography),
[Perception], [Stealth], and [Survival] checks equal to 1/2 her
druid level in desert terrain, and she cannot be tracked in such
environments. This ability replaces woodland stride.

**Sandwalker (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a desert druid suffers no
penalty to speed or on [Acrobatics] or [Stealth] checks when
moving through sandy or desert terrain. This ability replaces
trackless step.

**Desert Endurance (Ex)**: At 4th level, a desert druid ignores
the effects of a hot climate as if using *[Endure Elements]*. She
also has a reduced need to eat and drink, as if wearing a *[Ring
of Sustenance]* (though normal sleep is still required). This
ability replaces resist nature's lure.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: A desert druid gains this ability at 6th
level, except that her effective druid level for the ability is
equal to her druid level - 2. A desert druid cannot use wild
shape to adopt a plant form. At 10th level she can assume the
form of a Small or Medium vermin, at 12th level a Tiny or Large
vermin, and at 14th level a Diminutive or Huge vermin. This
effect functions as *[Beast Shape IV]* (treating the vermin as an
animal to determine its ability and natural armor modifiers).

**Shaded Vision (Ex)**: At 9th level, a desert druid becomes
immune to blinding and dazzling effects and gains a +2 bonus on
saving throws against gaze attacks and illusions of the figment
and pattern subschools. This ability replaces venom immunity.

**Dunemeld (Ex)**: At 13th level, a desert druid can assume the
form of a swirling mass of sand at will. This is equivalent to
*[Gaseous Form]*, but the druid gains a land and burrow speed of
10 feet rather than a fly speed. While in this form, the druid
gains a circumstance bonus on [Stealth] checks made in desert
terrain equal to her druid level. This ability replaces a
thousand faces.

### Jungle Druid

The fecund jungles of the equatorial regions are rich in life and
ancient tradition; druidical guardians of sacred pools, elder
trees, and trembling volcanoes watch over crumbling temples and
the inevitable reclamation of lost civilizations by the beating
heart of nature untamed.

**Jungle Guardian (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a jungle druid gains a
bonus on Initiative checks and [Climb], [Knowledge] (geography),
[Perception], [Stealth], and [Survival] checks equal to 1/2 her
druid level in jungle terrain, and she cannot be tracked in such
environments. This ability replaces woodland stride.

**Woodland Stride (Ex)**: A jungle druid gains this ability at
3rd level. This ability replaces trackless step.

**Torrid Endurance (Ex)**: At 4th level, a jungle druid ignores
the effects of a hot climate as if under the effects of *[Endure
Elements]*. She also gains a +4 bonus on saves against disease
and the exceptional abilities of animals and magical beasts. This
ability replaces resist nature's lure.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: A jungle druid gains this ability at 6th
level, except that her effective druid level for the ability is
equal to her druid level - 2.

**Verdant Sentinel (Ex)**: At 13th level, a jungle druid can
cast*[Tree Shape]* at will. This ability replaces a thousand
faces.

### Mountain Druid

As more and more of the soft, easy lands become cultivated and
civilized, many druids look for refuge and solitude among the
eternal peaks of the highest mountains.

**Mountaineer (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a mountain druid gains a
bonus on Initiative checks and [Climb], [Knowledge] (geography),
[Perception], [Stealth], and [Survival] checks equal to half her
druid level in mountainous terrain, and she cannot be tracked in
such an environment. This ability replaces woodland stride.

**Sure-Footed (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a mountain druid suffers no
penalty to speed or on [Acrobatics] or [Stealth] checks when
walking across steep slopes, rubble, or scree. This ability
replaces trackless step.

**Spire Walker (Ex)**: At 4th level, a mountain druid does not
lose her Dexterity bonus when climbing. A mountain druid is
immune to altitude sickness and ignores the effects of a cold
climate as if under the effects of *[Endure Elements]*. This
ability replaces resist nature's lure.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: A mountain druid gains this ability at 6th
level, except that her effective druid level for the ability is
equal to her druid level - 2. A mountain druid cannot use wild
shape to adopt a plant form. However, at 12th level she can
assume the form of a Large giant as if using *[Giant Form I]*. At
16th level, she may assume the form of a Huge giant as if using
*[Giant Form II]*.

**Mountain Stance (Ex)**: At 9th level, a mountain druid gains
immunity to petrification and receives a +4 bonus on saving
throws or to CMD to resist any attempt to push, pull, bull rush,
or drag her, or to resist any other effect that would physically
move her from her position (e.g., *[Repel Wood], [Reverse
Gravity],* or being blown away by high winds). This does not
protect her against being tripped, grappled, or overrun. This
ability replaces venom immunity.

**Mountain Stone (Ex)**: At 13th level, a mountain druid can
transform her body into a weathered stone outcrop and back at
will. This effect functions as *[Statue]*. This ability replaces
a thousand faces.

### Plains Druid

Out upon the wide and rolling prairies and savannahs, plains
druids stand guard over the grasslands. These druids range far
and wide, watching over nomadic tribes and wandering herds and
preserving the sometimes fragile ecosystem of the wide open
spaces.

**Plains Traveler (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a plains druid gains a
bonus on initiative checks and [Knowledge] (geography),
[Perception], [Stealth], and [Survival] checks equal to 1/2 her
druid level in plains terrain, and she cannot be tracked in such
an environment. This ability replaces woodland stride.

**Run Like the Wind (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a plains druid gains
+10 feet to her land speed when wearing light or no armor and
carrying a light load, and once per hour, she may run or charge
at double the normal speed for 1 round. If riding her animal
companion, it gains this ability instead. This ability replaces
trackless step.

**Savanna Ambush (Ex)**: At 4th level, a plains druid gains
concealment whenever she is prone in natural surroundings, and
can make [Stealth] checks at no penalty when prone and not moving
or at -5 when crawling. A plains druid can stand up from prone as
an immediate action during a surprise round. This ability
replaces resist nature's lure.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: A plains druid gains this ability at 6th
level, except that her effective druid level for the ability is
equal to her druid level - 2.

**Canny Charger (Ex)**: At 9th level, a plains druid can charge
through allies' squares without difficulty (whether mounted or
afoot) and can turn up to 90 degrees once during a charge,
provided the last 10 feet toward the target are in a straight
line. She also gains a +4 dodge bonus to AC against enemy charge
attacks and a +4 bonus to damage with a readied action against a
charging foe. This ability replaces venom immunity.

**Evasion (Ex)**: At 13th level, a plains druid gains evasion
when wearing light or no armor and carrying a light load. This
functions as the rogue ability of the same name. This ability
replaces a thousand faces.

### Swamp Druid

Some druids eschew pleasant glades and groves and instead seek
out dank marshes, misty bogs and heaths, and trackless swamps as
the place they call home and watch over with care, finding beauty
and life in abundance in places few others would willingly enter.

**Marshwight (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a swamp druid gains a bonus on
Initiative checks and [Knowledge] (geography), [Perception],
[Stealth], [Swim], and [Survival] checks equal to 1/2 her druid
level in swamp terrain, and she cannot be tracked in such an
environment. This ability replaces woodland stride.

**Swamp Strider (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a swamp druid suffers no
penalty to speed or on [Acrobatics] or [Stealth] checks in bogs
and undergrowth. This ability replaces trackless step.

**Pond Scum (Ex)**: At 4th level, a swamp druid gains a +4 bonus
on saves against disease and the exceptional, supernatural, and
spell-like abilities of monstrous humanoids. A swamp druid also
gains DR/— equal to half her druid level against attacks by
swarms. If this damage resistance prevents damage, the druid is
unaffected by distraction or other special attacks of the
swarm. This ability replaces resist nature's lure.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: A swamp druid gains this ability at 6th
level, except that her effective druid level for the ability is
equal to her druid level - 2.

**Slippery (Ex)**: At 13th level, a swamp druid gains continuous
*[Freedom of Movement]*.  This ability replaces a thousand faces.

### Urban Druid

While many druids keep to the wilderness, some make their way
within settlements, communing with the animals and vermin who
live there and speaking for the nature that runs rampant in
civilization's very cradle.

**Spontaneous Casting**: An urban druid can channel stored spell
energy into domain spells that she has not prepared ahead of
time. She can “lose” a prepared spell in order to cast any domain
spell of the same level or lower. This ability replaces the
ability to spontaneously cast summon nature's ally spells.

**Nature Bond (Ex)**: An urban druid may not select an animal
companion.  Instead, she must choose from the following domains,
rather than those usually available to druids: Charm, Community,
Knowledge, Nobility, Protection, Repose, Rune, or Weather.

**Lorekeeper (Ex)**: At 2nd level, an urban druid adds
[Diplomacy], [Knowledge] (history), [Knowledge] (local), and
[Knowledge] (nobility) skills to her list of class skills. She
also receives a +2 bonus on these skill checks. This ability
replaces a druid's woodland stride and trackless step abilities.

**Resist Temptation (Ex)**: At 4th level, an urban druid gains a
+2 bonus on saves vs. divinations and enchantments. This replaces
the resist nature's lure ability.

**A Thousand Faces (Su)**: An urban druid gains this ability at
6th level.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: An urban druid gains this ability at 8th
level, except that her effective druid level for the ability is
equal to her druid level - 4.

**Mental Strength (Ex)**: At 9th level, an urban druid gains
immunity to charm and compulsion effects. This ability replaces
venom immunity.

### Animal Shamans

Some druids form a close bond with one type of animal. The
following animal shamans represent just some of the
possibilities, exploring the unique bond between a druid and her
totem. These shamans all possess similar powers, which are
explained fully in the bear shaman description.

#### Bear Shaman

A shaman with this focus calls upon the mighty bear, titan of the
woodlands and mountains, a paragon of strength and ferocity, and
yet also a quiet protector rich in wisdom.

**Nature Bond**: A bear shaman who chooses an animal companion
must select a bear. If choosing a domain, the bear shaman must
choose from the Animal, Earth, Protection, and Strength domains.

**Wild Empathy (Ex)**: A bear shaman can use wild empathy with
bears and wolverines as a full-round action with a +4 bonus.

**Totem Transformation (Su)**: At 2nd level, a bear shaman may
adopt an aspect of the bear while retaining her normal form. She
gains one of the following bonuses: movement (+10 enhancement
bonus to land speed, +4 racial bonus on [Swim] checks), senses
(low-light vision, scent), toughness (+2 natural armor bonus to
AC, [Endurance] feat), or natural weapons (bite [1d6] and 2 claws
[1d4] for a Medium shaman, +2 to CMB on grapple checks). While
using totem transformation, the bear shaman may speak normally
and can cast *[Speak with Animals]* (mammals only) at will. Using
this ability is a standard action at 2nd level, a move action at
7th level, and a swift action at 12th level. The bear shaman can
use this ability for a number of minutes per day equal to her
druid level. These minutes do not need to be consecutive, but
they must be used in 1-minute increments. This is a polymorph
effect and cannot be used while the druid is using another
polymorph effect, such as wild shape.

**Totemic Summons (Su)**: At 5th level, a bear shaman may cast
*summon nature's ally* as a standard action when summoning bears,
and summoned bears gain temporary hit points equal to her druid
level. She can apply the young template to any bear to reduce the
level of the summoning spell required by one. She can also
increase the level of summoning required by one in order to apply
either the advanced or the giant template, or increase it by two
to apply both the advanced and giant templates. This ability
replaces a thousand faces.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: At 6th level, a bear shaman's wild shape
ability functions at her druid level - 2. If she takes on the
form of a bear, she instead uses her druid level + 2.

**Bonus Feat**: At 9th level and every 4 levels thereafter, a
bear shaman gains one of the following bonus feats: [Diehard],
[Endurance], [Great Fortitude], [Improved Great Fortitude],
[Toughness]. She must meet the prerequisites for these bonus
feats. This ability replaces venom immunity.

#### Eagle Shaman

A shaman with this totem calls upon the noble eagle, stern and
proud, soaring high above the world with keen and pitiless eyes
that miss nothing.

**Nature Bond**: An eagle shaman who chooses an animal companion
must select a bird (eagle). If choosing a domain, the eagle
shaman must choose from the Air, Animal, Nobility, and Weather
domains.

**Wild Empathy (Ex)**: An eagle shaman can use wild empathy with
birds as a full-round action with a +4 bonus.

**Totem Transformation (Su)**: At 2nd level, an eagle shaman may
adopt an aspect of the eagle while retaining her normal
form. This ability functions as the bear shaman ability, but the
druid may select from the following bonuses: movement (fly speed
30 feet [Average], the druid must be 5th level to select this
bonus), senses (low-light vision, +4 racial bonus to
[Perception]), or natural weapons (bite [1d4], 2 talons [1d4] for
a Medium shaman). While using totem transformation, the eagle
shaman may speak normally and can cast *[speak with animals]*
(birds only) at will.

**Totemic Summons (Su)**: At 5th level, an eagle shaman may cast
*summon nature's ally* as a standard action when summoning
eagles, rocs, and giant eagles (added to the 4th-level list), and
these summoned creatures gain temporary hit points equal to her
druid level. This ability otherwise functions as the bear shaman
ability.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: At 6th level, an eagle shaman's wild shape
ability functions at her druid level - 2. If she takes on the
form of an eagle or roc, she instead uses her druid level + 2.

**Bonus Feat**: At 9th level and every 4 levels thereafter, an
eagle shaman gains one of the following bonus feats: [Flyby
Attack], [Improved Lightning Reflexes], [Lightning Reflexes],
[Skill Focus] ([Perception]), or [Wind Stance]. She must meet the
prerequisites for these bonus feats. This ability replaces venom
immunity.

#### Lion Shaman

A shaman with this totem calls upon the proud lion, imposing and
majestic, the mighty leader of deadly hunters.

**Nature Bond**: A lion shaman who chooses an animal companion
must select a lion. If choosing a domain, the lion shaman must
choose from the Animal, Glory, Nobility, and Sun domains.

**Wild Empathy (Ex)**: A lion shaman can use wild empathy with
felines as a full-round action with a +4 bonus.

**Totem Transformation (Su)**: At 2nd level, a lion shaman may
adopt an aspect of the lion while retaining her normal form. This
ability functions as the bear shaman ability, but the druid may
select from the following bonuses: movement (+20 enhancement
bonus to land speed), senses (low-light vision, scent), or
natural weapons (bite [1d4], 2 claws [1d4] for a Medium druid,
rake, +2 CMB to grapple). While using totem transformation, the
lion shaman may speak normally and can cast *[speak with
animals]* (felines only) at will.

**Totemic Summons (Su)**: At 5th level, a lion shaman may cast
*summon nature's ally* as a standard action when summoning
felines, and these summoned creatures gain temporary hit points
equal to her druid level.  This ability otherwise functions as
the bear shaman ability.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: At 6th level, a lion shaman's wild shape
ability functions at her druid level - 2. If she takes on the
form of a feline, she instead uses her druid level + 2.

**Bonus Feat**: At 9th level and every 4 levels thereafter, a
lion shaman gains one of the following bonus feats: [Dodge],
[Improved Iron Will], [Iron Will], or [Skill Focus]
([Acrobatics]). She must meet the prerequisites for these bonus
feats. This ability replaces venom immunity.

#### Serpent Shaman

A shaman with this totem calls upon the cunning serpent, the
stealthy deceiver who draws the weak minded in and strikes while
they are unaware. Some hate its treacherous nature, while others
praise its thoughtful pragmatism.

**Nature Bond**: A serpent shaman who chooses an animal companion
must select a snake. If choosing a domain, the serpent shaman
must choose from the Animal, Charm, Trickery, and Water domains.

**Wild Empathy (Ex)**: A serpent shaman can use wild empathy with
reptiles as a full-round action with a +4 bonus.

**Totem Transformation (Su)**: At 2nd level, a serpent shaman may
adopt an aspect of the snake while retaining her normal
form. This ability functions as the bear shaman ability, but the
druid may select from the following bonuses: movement (climb
speed 20 feet, swim speed 20 feet), scales (+2 natural armor
bonus to AC), senses (low-light vision, scent), or natural
weapons (bite [1d4], poison [*frequency*1 round (6), *effect* 1
Con damage, *Cure*1 save, Con-based DC] for a Medium druid, +2
CMB to grapple). While using totem transformation, the serpent
shaman may speak normally and can cast *[Speak with Animals]*
(reptiles only) at will.

**Totemic Summons (Su)**: At 5th level, a serpent shaman may cast
*summon nature's ally* as a standard action when summoning
*snakes, and these summoned creatures gain temporary hit points
*equal to her druid level. This ability otherwise functions as
*the bear shaman ability.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: At 6th level, a serpent shaman's wild shape
ability functions at her druid level - 2. If she takes on the
form of a snake, she instead uses her druid level + 2.

**Bonus Feat**: At 9th level and every 4 levels thereafter, a
serpent shaman gains one of the following bonus feats: [Combat
Expertise], [Improved Feint], [Skill Focus] ([Bluff]),
[Stealthy], or [Strike Back]. She must meet the prerequisites for
these bonus feats. This ability replaces venom immunity.

#### Wolf Shaman

A shaman with this totem calls upon the clever wolf, capable of
roaming alone yet wise enough to run with a pack when facing
dangers too great for one alone.

**Nature Bond**: A wolf shaman who chooses an animal companion
must select a wolf. If choosing a domain, the wolf shaman must
choose from the Animal, Community, Liberation, and Travel
domains.

**Wild Empathy (Ex)**: A wolf shaman can use wild empathy with
canines as a full-round action with a +4 bonus.

**Totem Transformation (Su)**: At 2nd level, a wolf shaman may
adopt an aspect of the wolf while retaining her normal form. This
ability functions as the bear shaman ability, but the druid may
select from the following bonuses: movement (+20 enhancement
bonus to land speed), senses (low-light vision, scent, +4 racial
bonus to [Survival] when tracking by scent), or natural weapons
(bite [1d4 plus trip] for a Medium druid, +2 CMB to trip). While
using totem transformation, the wolf shaman may speak normally
and can cast *[Speak with Animals]* (canines only) at will.

**Totemic Summons (Su)**: At 5th level, a wolf shaman may cast
*summon nature's ally* as a standard action when summoning
canines, and these summoned creatures gain temporary hit points
equal to her druid level.  This ability otherwise functions as
the bear shaman ability.

**Wild Shape (Su)**: At 6th level, a wolf shaman's wild shape
ability functions at her druid level - 2. If she takes on the
form of a canine, she instead uses her druid level + 2.

**Bonus Feat**: At 9th level and every 4 levels thereafter, a
wolf shaman gains one of the following bonus feats: [Greater
Trip], [Improved Trip], [Mobility], [Skill Focus] ([Stealth]), or
[Spring Attack]. She must meet the prerequisites for these bonus
feats. This ability replaces venom immunity.


## Fighter

From dockside brawlers to legendary champions, poor foot soldiers
to the greatest duelists of the nobility, fighters are those who
devote themselves wholeheartedly to the art of combat. While
barbarians tap into raw fury in battle, fighters know that the
mind is the keenest weapon, and they use theirs to great effect,
mastering numerous armaments and fighting styles in a
never-ending quest to be the last warrior standing.

Presented below are a number of common martial themes, complete
with variant class abilities to help customize characters to
their chosen fighting style.

### Archer

The archer is dedicated to the careful mastery of the bow,
perfecting his skills with years of practice honed day after day
on ranges and hunting for game, or else on the battlefield,
raining destruction down on the enemy lines.

**Hawkeye (Ex)**: At 2nd level, an archer gains a +1 bonus on
[Perception] checks, and the range increment for any bow he uses
increases by 5 feet. These bonuses increase by +1 and 5
additional feet for every 4 levels beyond 2nd. This ability
replaces bravery.

**Trick Shot (Ex)**: At 3rd level, an archer can choose one of
the following combat maneuvers or actions: disarm, feint, or
sunder. He can perform this action with a bow against any target
within 30 feet, with a -4 penalty to his CMB. Every four levels
beyond 3rd, he may choose an additional trick shot to
learn. These maneuvers use up arrows as normal.

At 11th level, he may also choose from the following combat
maneuvers: bull rush, grapple, trip. A target grappled by an
arrow can break free by destroying the archer's arrow (hardness
5, hit points 1, break DC 13) or with an [Escape Artist] or CMB
check (against the archer's CMD -4). This ability replaces armor
training 1, 2, 3, and 4.

**Expert Archer (Ex)**: At 5th level, an archer gains a +1 bonus
on attack and damage rolls with bows. This bonus increases by +1
for every four levels beyond 5th. This ability replaces weapon
training 1.

**Safe Shot (Ex)**: At 9th level, an archer does not provoke
attacks of opportunity when making ranged attacks with a
bow. This ability replaces weapon training 2.

**Evasive Archer (Ex)**: At 13th level, an archer gains a +2
dodge bonus to AC against ranged attacks. This bonus increases to
+4 at 17th level.  This ability replaces weapon training 3.

**Volley (Ex)**: At 17th level, as a full-round action, an archer
can make a single bow attack at his highest base attack bonus
against any number of creatures in a 15-foot- radius burst,
making separate attack and damage rolls for each creature. This
ability replaces weapon training 4.

**Ranged Defense (Ex)**: At 19th level, an archer gains DR 5/—
against ranged attacks. In addition, as an immediate action, he
can catch an arrow fired at him and shoot it any target he
chooses, as if he had the [Snatch Arrows] feat. This ability
replaces armor mastery.

**Weapon Mastery (Ex)**: An archer must choose a type of bow.

### Crossbowman

The crossbowman has perfected the deadly use of the crossbow, a
simple but cruelly efficient weapon, as a craftsman mastering a
lethal tool.

**Deadshot (Ex)**: At 3rd level, when a crossbowman attacks with
a crossbow as a readied action, he may add 1/2 his Dexterity
bonus (minimum +1) on his damage roll. This ability replaces
armor training 1.

**Crossbow Expert (Ex)**: At 5th level, a crossbowman gains a +1
bonus on attack and damage rolls with crossbows. This bonus
increases by +1 per four levels after 5th. This ability replaces
weapon training 1.

**Improved Deadshot (Ex)**: At 7th level, when a crossbowman
attacks with a crossbow as a readied action, his target is denied
its Dexterity bonus to its AC. This ability replaces armor
training 2.

**Quick Sniper (Ex)**: At 9th level, a crossbowman gains a bonus
equal to 1/2 his fighter level on [Stealth] checks when
sniping. When he is hit with a ranged attack, he can shoot his
crossbow at his attacker as an immediate action if it is
loaded. This ability replaces weapon training 2.

**Greater Deadshot (Ex)**: At 11th level, when a crossbowman
attacks with a crossbow as a readied action, he may add his
Dexterity bonus (minimum +1) on his damage roll. This ability
replaces armor training 3.

**Safe Shot (Ex)**: At 13th level, a crossbowman does not provoke
attacks of opportunity when making ranged attacks with a
crossbow. This ability replaces weapon training 3.

**Pinpoint Targeting**: At 15th level, a crossbowman
gains[Pinpoint Targeting] as a bonus feat. This ability replaces
armor training 4.

**Meteor Shot (Ex)**: At 17th level, as a standard action, a
crossbowman can make one attack with a crossbow at a -4
penalty. If the attack hits, it inflicts damage normally and the
target is subject to a bull rush or a trip maneuver using the
attack roll as the combat maneuver check. The crossbowman must
decide which maneuver to attempt before making his attack
roll. This ability replaces weapon training 4.

**Penetrating Shot (Ex)**: At 19th level, when a crossbowman
confirms a critical hit with a crossbow, the bolt pierces the
target and can strike another creature in line behind it. The
crossbowman must be able to trace a line starting at his space
and passing through both targets to make this additional
attack. The secondary attack is made at a -4 penalty, in addition
to any modifiers for added range. If this attack is also a
critical hit, the bolt can continue to hit another target, but
the penalties stack. This ability replaces armor mastery.

**Weapon Mastery (Ex)**: A crossbowman must choose a type of
  crossbow.

### Free Hand Fighter

The free hand fighter specializes in the delicate art of handling
a single weapon in one hand while using his free hand to balance,
block, tip, and distract his opponents. While not a brawler, his
open hand is as much a weapon as a bow or blade. His fighting
school benefits only apply when he is using a one-handed weapon
and carrying nothing in his other hand.

**Deceptive Strike (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a free hand fighter
gains a +1 bonus to CMB and CMD on disarm checks and on [Bluff]
checks to feint or create a diversion to hide. This bonus
increases by +1 for every four levels after 2nd. This ability
replaces bravery.

**Elusive (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a free hand fighter gains a +1
dodge bonus to AC. This bonus increases by +1 for every four
levels after 2nd.  This bonus does not apply when wearing medium
or heavy armor or carrying a medium or heavier load. This ability
replaces armor training 1, 2, 3, and 4.

**Singleton (Ex)**: At 5th level, a free hand fighter gains a +1
bonus on attack and damage rolls when wielding a melee weapon in
one hand and leaving his other hand free. This bonus increases by
+1 per six levels after 5th. This ability replaces weapon
training 1 and 4.

**Timely Tip (Ex)**: At 9th level, a free hand fighter can make a
disarm combat maneuver against a target he threatens as a move
action to push aside the target's shield. If successful, the
target loses its shield bonus to AC against the free hand
fighter's next attack. This ability replaces weapon training 2.

**Interference (Ex)**: At 13th level, a free hand fighter can
make a disarm or trip combat maneuver against a target he
threatens as a move action to push his opponent off balance. If
successful, the target becomes flat-footed. This condition lasts
until the target takes damage from a melee or ranged attack or
until the beginning of the free hand fighter's next turn,
whichever comes first. This ability replaces weapon training 3.

**Reversal (Ex)**: At 19th level, a free hand fighter can make a
disarm combat maneuver against a creature he threatens as an
immediate action when he is the target of a melee attack from
another creature. If successful, the attack changes to target the
target of the free hand fighter's maneuver instead of the free
hand fighter himself. This ability replaces armor mastery.

### Mobile Fighter

Where some fighters focus on strength and raw power, the mobile
fighter relies on swiftness and mobility, gliding across the
battlefield like a steel whirlwind and leaving destruction in his
wake.

**Agility (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a mobile fighter gains a +1 bonus
on saving throws made against effects that cause him to become
paralyzed, slowed, or entangled. This bonus increases by +1 for
every four levels beyond 2nd. This ability replaces bravery.

**Leaping Attack (Ex)**: At 5th level, when a mobile fighter
moves at least 5 feet prior to attacking, he gains a +1 bonus on
attack and damage rolls. This bonus increases by +1 for every
four levels beyond 5th. This ability replaces weapon training 1,
2, 3, and 4.

**Rapid Attack (Ex)**: At 11th level, a mobile fighter can
combine a full attack action with a single move. He must forgo
the attack at his highest bonus but may take the remaining
attacks at any point during his movement. This movement provokes
attacks of opportunity as normal. This ability replaces armor
training 3.

**[Fleet] Footed (Ex)**: At 15th level, the mobile fighter's
speed increases by 10 feet. He can take 10 on [Acrobatics] checks
even while distracted or threatened, and can take 20 on an
[Acrobatics] check once per day for every five fighter levels he
possesses. This ability replaces armor training 4.

**Whirlwind Blitz (Ex)**: At 20th level, a mobile fighter can
make a full-attack action as a standard action. He may also use
the [Whirlwind Attack] feat as a standard action.  This ability
replaces weapon mastery.

### Phalanx Soldier

The phalanx soldier specializes in defensive tactics, using his
shield to guard himself and his allies and forming a shield wall
like an unbreakable anvil against which his enemies break.

**Stand Firm (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a phalanx soldier gains a +1
bonus to CMD against bull rush, overrun, and trip attempts. This
bonus also applies on saves against trample attacks. The bonus
increases by +1 for every four levels beyond 2nd. This ability
replaces bravery.

**Phalanx Fighting (Ex)**: At 3rd level, when a phalanx soldier
wields a shield, he can use any polearm or spear of his size as a
one-handed weapon. This ability replaces armor training 1.

**Ready Pike (Ex)**: At 5th level, a phalanx soldier can, once
per day, ready a weapon with the brace property as an immediate
action, gaining a +1 bonus on attack and damage rolls. For every
four levels beyond 5th, this bonus increases by +1, and he can
use the ability one additional time per day. He cannot use this
ability when flat-footed. This ability replaces weapon training
1.

**Deft Shield (Ex)**: At 7th level, the armor check penalty from
a shield and the attack roll penalty are reduced by -1 for a
phalanx soldier using a tower shield. At 11th level, these
penalties are reduced by -2. This ability replaces armor training
2 and 3.

**Shield Ally (Ex)**: At 9th level, when a phalanx fighter is
using a heavy or tower shield, he can, as a move action, provide
partial cover (+2 cover bonus to AC, +1 bonus on Reflex saves) to
himself and all adjacent allies until the beginning of his next
turn.

At 13th level, he can instead provide cover (+4 cover bonus to
AC, +2 bonus on Reflex saves) and evasion (as a rogue) to one
adjacent ally until the beginning of his next turn. This cover
does not allow [Stealth] checks.

At 17th level, he can provide cover to himself and all adjacent
allies, or he can provide improved cover (+8 cover bonus to AC,
+4 bonus on Reflex saves, improved evasion) to a single adjacent
ally. This ability replaces weapon training 2, 3, and 4.

**Irresistible Advance (Ex)**: At 15th level, a phalanx fighter
gains a bonus on bull rush and overrun CMB checks. This bonus
depends on the type of shield used: +1 with a buckler, +2 with a
light shield, +3 with a heavy shield, or +4 with a tower
shield. This ability replaces armor training 4.

**Shielded Fortress (Ex)**: At 20th level, a phalanx fighter's
shield cannot be disarmed or sundered. He gains evasion (as a
rogue) when using a shield (improved evasion when using a tower
shield). As a move action, a phalanx fighter can provide evasion
to all adjacent allies until the beginning of his next turn. As
an immediate action, he can provide improved evasion to an
adjacent ally against one attack. This ability replaces weapon
mastery.

### Polearm Master

The polearm master is schooled in the ancient wisdom that enemies
are best faced at the end of long striking pole, lashing like a
serpent before clumsy swords and axes can even be brought to
bear.

**Pole Fighting (Ex)**: At 2nd level, as an immediate action, a
polearm master can shorten the grip on his spear or polearm with
reach and use it against adjacent targets. This action results in
a -4 penalty on attack rolls with that weapon until he spends
another immediate action to return to the normal grip. The
penalty is reduced by -1 for every four levels beyond 2nd. This
ability replaces bravery.

**Steadfast Pike (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a polearm master gains a
+1 bonus on attack rolls with readied attacks and attacks of
opportunity made with a spear or polearm. The bonus increases by
+1 for every four levels beyond 3rd. This ability replaces armor
training 1, 2, 3, and 4.

**Polearm Training (Ex)**: At 5th level, a polearm master gains a
+1 bonus on attack and damage rolls with spears and polearms. The
bonus increases by +1 for every four levels beyond 5th. This
ability replaces weapon training 1.

**Flexible Flanker (Ex)**: At 9th level, a polearm master may
choose any square adjacent to him and treat that square as his
location for determining who he is flanking, even if that square
is occupied by a creature, object, or solid barrier. This ability
replaces weapon training 2.

**Sweeping Fend (Ex)**: At 13th level, a polearm master can use
any spear or pole arm to make a bull rush or trip maneuver,
though he takes a -4 penalty to his CMB when making such
attempts. Weapons with the trip property do not incur this
penalty on trip maneuvers. This ability replaces weapon training
3.

**Step Aside (Ex)**: At 17th level, when a creature threatened by
a polearm master takes a 5-foot step into a square adjacent to
him, he can take a 5-foot step as an immediate action. This
5-foot step must be subtracted from his movement on the next
turn. He also gains a +2 dodge bonus to his AC against that
opponent until the end of his next turn.  This ability replaces
weapon training 4.

**Polearm Parry (Ex)**: At 19th level, when an opponent
threatened by a polearm master makes a melee attack against an
ally, he may take an immediate action to grant his ally a +2
shield bonus to AC and DR 5/— against that attack. He may use
this ability to protect himself, but only if the attacking
creature is not adjacent to him. This ability replaces armor
mastery.

**Weapon Mastery (Ex)**: A polearm master must choose a spear or
polearm.

### Roughrider

Roughriders study and practice the fine points of mounted combat,
drilling endlessly with warbeasts—from noble thoroughbreds to
trained monsters—to form a perfect synergy between rider and
steed.

**Steadfast Mount (Ex)**: At 2nd level, after a roughrider has
spent 1 hour practicing with a mount, the mount gains a +1 dodge
bonus to AC and a +1 morale bonus on saves, but only while the
roughrider is mounted on it or adjacent to it. This bonus
increases by +1 for every four levels after 2nd. This ability
replaces bravery.

**Armored Charger (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a roughrider no longer
suffers armor check penalties on [Ride] skill checks. His mount's
speed is not reduced when carrying a medium load or wearing
medium barding. This ability replaces armor training 1.

**Mounted Mettle (Ex)**: At 5th level, a roughrider and his mount
gain a +1 bonus on attack and damage rolls when he is mounted or
adjacent to his mount. This bonus increases by +1 for every four
levels after 5th.  This ability replaces weapon training 1, 2, 3,
and 4.

**Leap from the Saddle (Ex)**: At 7th level, after a roughrider's
mount takes a single move, he may attempt a fast dismount (DC 20
[Ride] check). If he succeeds, he can take a full attack
action. This ability replaces armor training 2.

**Relentless Steed (Ex)**: At 11th level, a roughrider's mount
does not reduce its speed when wearing heavy barding or carrying
a heavy load.  The roughrider may also reroll a [Ride] skill
check or a saving throw made by the mount once per day, but must
use the second roll even if it is worse. This ability may be used
one additional time per day for every four levels beyond
11th. This ability replaces armor training 3.

**[Ride] Them Down (Ex)**: At 15th level, can spur his mount on
while readying an attack. If a roughrider's mount takes a single
move, the roughrider can make a full attack, taking his attacks
at any point during his mount's movement. If he has the [Trample]
feat, he may substitute an overrun combat maneuver for each of
his attacks. This movement provokes attacks of opportunity
against the roughrider but not his mount. This ability replaces
armor training 4.

**Unavoidable Onslaught (Ex)**: At 15th level, a roughrider's
mounted charge is not blocked by friendly creatures or difficult
terrain. This ability replaces armor training 4.

**Indomitable Steed (Ex)**: At 19th level, a roughrider and his
steed gain DR 5/— when mounted. This ability replaces armor
mastery.

### Savage Warrior

Warriors' might is not measured only by their skill with steel,
but also by their ability to inflict death with fang and claw,
horn and hoof, and every exotic appendage the natural and
unnatural world has to offer.

**Spark of Life (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a savage warrior gains a +1
bonus on saving throws made against energy drain and death
effects. This bonus increases by +1 for every four levels beyond
2nd. This ability replaces bravery.

**Natural Savagery (Ex)**: At 5th level, a savage warrior gains a
+1 bonus on attack and damage rolls with natural weapons. This
bonus also applies to CMB and CMD for grappling. This bonus
increases by +1 for every four levels beyond 5th. This ability
replaces weapon training 1.

**Savage Charge (Ex)**: At 9th level, when a savage warrior
attacks with a natural weapon at the end of a charge, he gains a
bonus on his natural weapon attack rolls equal to half his
fighter level, while suffering a penalty to his AC equal to half
his fighter level. These replace the normal attack roll bonus and
AC penalty for charging. This bonus also applies to his CMB for a
bull rush or overrun combat maneuvers made when charging. This
ability replaces weapon training 2.

**Careful Claw (Ex)**: At 13th level, when using a natural weapon
to attack a creature using *[Fire Shield]* or a similar effect
that damages creatures attacking it (such as a barbed devil's
barbed defense), a savage warrior reduces the damage from such
effects by an amount equal to 1/2 his fighter level. This ability
replaces weapon training 3.

**Greater Savage Charge (Ex)**: At 17th level, when using savage
charge, the AC penalty is reduced to 1/4 his fighter level
instead of 1/2 his fighter level. In addition, a savage warrior
can charge through friendly creatures and difficult terrain. This
ability replaces weapon training 4.

**Natural Weapon Mastery (Ex)**: At 20th level, a savage warrior
must choose one natural weapon. This ability replaces weapon
mastery.

### Shielded Fighter

A shielded fighter focuses on both offense and defense, blending
weapon and shield in perfect balance to impede his enemies while
delivering deadly blows, and even turning the shield itself into
a formidable weapon. These fighting school benefits apply when
wielding a weapon and a shield simultaneously.

**Active Defense (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a shielded fighter gains a
+1 dodge bonus to AC when wielding a shield and fighting
defensively, using [Combat Expertise], or using total
defense. This bonus increases by +1 for every four levels beyond
3rd. As a swift action, he may share this bonus with one adjacent
ally, or half of the bonus (minimum +0) with all adjacent allies,
until the beginning of his next turn. This ability replaces armor
training 1, 2, 3, and 4.

**Shield Fighter (Ex)**: At 5th level, a shielded fighter gains a
+1 bonus on attack and damage rolls when making a shield
bash. These bonuses increase by +1 every four levels beyond
5th. With a full attack action, a shielded fighter may alternate
between using his weapon or his shield for each attack. This
action does not grant additional attacks or incur penalties as
two-weapon fighting does. This ability replaces weapon training
1.

**Shield Buffet (Ex)**: At 9th level, as a move action, a
shielded fighter may make a combat maneuver check to use his
shield to impede an adjacent enemy. If successful, the target
suffers a -2 penalty on its attack rolls against the shielded
fighter and a -2 penalty to AC on attacks made by the shielded
fighter until the beginning of his next turn.

At 13th level, a shielded fighter may use this ability as a swift
action. This ability replaces weapon training 2 and 3.

**Shield Guard (Ex)**: At 17th level, as a swift action, a
shielded fighter may designate one square adjacent to him. He may
designate two squares if using a heavy shield or three squares if
using a tower shield, but these squares must be
contiguous. Enemies in these squares cannot flank the shielded
fighter and do not count for flanking with other creatures. This
effect lasts until he moves from his position or uses another
swift action to change the affected squares. This ability
replaces weapon training 4.

**Shield Mastery (Ex)**: At 19th level, a shielded fighter gains
DR 5/— when wielding a shield. This ability replaces armor
mastery.

**Shield Ward (Ex)**: At 20th level, a shielded fighter gains
evasion (as a rogue) while wielding a shield, and adds his shield
bonus to his AC (not including enhancement bonuses) on Reflex
saves and to his touch AC. In addition, his shield cannot be
disarmed or sundered. This ability replaces weapon mastery.

### Two-Handed Fighter

Some fighters focus their efforts on finding the biggest,
heaviest, most imposing weapon they can find and training to
manage and harness the weight of their massive weapons for
maximum impact. These fighting school benefits only apply when
using two-handed weapons.

**Shattering Strike (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a two-handed fighter
gains a +1 bonus to CMB and CMD on sunder attempts and on damage
rolls made against objects. These bonuses increase by +1 for
every four levels beyond 2nd. This ability replaces bravery.

**Overhand Chop (Ex)**: At 3rd level, when a two-handed fighter
makes a single attack (with the attack action or a charge) with a
two-handed weapon, he adds double his Strength bonus on damage
rolls. This ability replaces armor training 1.

**Weapon Training (Ex)**: As the fighter class feature, but the
bonuses only apply when wielding two-handed melee weapons.

**Backswing (Ex)**: At 7th level, when a two-handed fighter makes
a full attack with a two-handed weapon, he adds double his
Strength bonus on damage rolls for all attacks after the
first. This ability replaces armor training 2.

**Piledriver (Ex)**: At 11th level, as a standard action, a
two-handed fighter can make a single melee attack with a
two-handed weapon. If the attack hits, he may make a bull rush or
trip combat maneuver against the target of his attack as a free
action that does not provoke an attack of opportunity. This
ability replaces armor training 3.

**Greater [Power Attack] (Ex)**: At 15th level, when using [Power
Attack] with a two-handed melee weapon, the bonus damage from
[Power Attack] is doubled (+100%) instead of increased by half
(+50%). This ability replaces armor training 4.

**Devastating Blow (Ex)**: At 19th level, as a standard action, a
two-handed fighter may make a single melee attack with a
two-handed weapon at a -5 penalty. If the attack hits, it is
treated as a critical threat. Special weapon abilities that
activate only on a critical hit do not activate if this critical
hit is confirmed. This ability replaces armor mastery.

### Two-Weapon Warrior

Trained under great masters who preached the simple truth that
two are better than one when it comes to weapons, the two-weapon
warrior is a terror when his hands are full. From paired daggers
to exotic double weapons, all combinations come equally alive in
his skilled hands.

**Defensive Flurry (Ex)**: At 3rd level, when a two-weapon
warrior makes a full attack with both weapons, he gains a +1
dodge bonus to AC against melee attacks until the beginning of
his next turn. This bonus increases by +1 every four levels after
3rd. This ability replaces armor training 1 and 2.

**Twin Blades (Ex)**: At 5th level, a two-weapon warrior gains a
+1 bonus on attack and damage rolls when making a full attack
with two weapons or a double weapon. This bonus increases by +1
for every four levels after 5th. This ability replaces weapon
training 1.

**Doublestrike (Ex)**: At 9th level, a two-weapon warrior may, as
a standard action, make one attack with both his primary and
secondary weapons. The penalties for attacking with two weapons
apply normally.  This ability replaces weapon training 2.

**Improved Balance (Ex)**: At 11th level, the attack penalties
for fighting with two weapons are reduced by -1 for a two-weapon
warrior.  Alternatively, he may use a one-handed weapon in his
off-hand, treating it as if it were a light weapon with the
normal light weapon penalties.  This ability replaces armor
training 3.

**Equal Opportunity (Ex)**: At 13th level, when a two-weapon
warrior makes an attack of opportunity, he may attack once with
both his primary and secondary weapons. The penalties for
attacking with two weapons apply normally. This ability replaces
weapon training 3.

**Perfect Balance (Ex)**: At 15th level, the penalties for
fighting with two weapons are reduced by an additional -1 for a
two-weapon warrior.  This benefit stacks with improved
balance. If he is using a one-handed weapon in his off hand,
treating it as a light weapon, he uses the normal light weapon
penalties. This ability replaces armor training 4.

**Deft Doublestrike (Ex)**: At 17th level, when a two-weapon
warrior hits an opponent with both weapons, he can make a disarm
or sunder attempt (or trip, if one or both weapons can be used to
trip) against that opponent as an immediate action that does not
provoke attacks of opportunity. This ability replaces weapon
training 4.

**Deadly Defense (Ex)**: At 19th level, when a two-weapon warrior
makes a full attack with both weapons, every creature that hits
him with a melee attack before the beginning of his next turn
provokes an attack of opportunity from the warrior. This ability
replaces armor mastery.

### Weapon Master

Devoted to the perfection of a single weapon, the weapon master's
meditations upon his favored weapon border on the obsessive, but
none can deny his consummate skill. The weapon master must select
a single type of weapon (such as longsword or shortbow). All of
his abilities apply to that weapon type.

**Weapon Guard (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a weapon master gains a +1
bonus to CMD against disarm and sunder attempts while wielding
his chosen weapon.  This bonus also applies on saves against any
effect that targets his chosen weapon (for example, *[Grease],
[Heat Metal], [Shatter], [Warp Wood]*). The bonus increases by +1
for every four levels beyond 2nd. This ability replaces bravery.

**Weapon Training (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a weapon master gains a
+1 bonus on attack and damage rolls with his chosen weapon. The
bonus improves by +1 for every four levels beyond 3rd. This
ability replaces armor training 1, 2, 3, and 4.

**Reliable Strike (Ex)**: At 5th level, a weapon master may
reroll an attack roll, critical hit confirmation roll, miss
chance check, or damage roll as an immediate action. He must
accept the second roll even if it is worse. He can use this
ability once per day at 5th level, plus one additional time per
day for every five levels beyond 5th. This ability replaces
weapon training 1.

**Mirror Move (Ex)**: At 9th level, a weapon master gains his
weapon training bonus as an insight bonus to AC when attacked by
his chosen weapon. This ability replaces weapon training 2.

**Deadly Critical (Ex)**: At 13th level, when a weapon master
confirms a critical hit with his chosen weapon, he can increase
the weapon's damage multiplier by +1 as an immediate action. He
can use this ability once per day at 13th level, plus one
additional time per day for every three levels above 13th. This
ability replaces weapon training 3.

**Critical Specialist (Ex)**: At 17th level, the save DCs of any
effects caused by a critical hit with a weapon master's chosen
weapon increase by +4. This ability replaces weapon training 4.

**Unstoppable Strike (Ex)**: At 19th level, a weapon master can
take a standard action to make one attack with his chosen weapon
as a touch attack that ignores damage reduction (or hardness, if
attacking an object). This ability replaces armor mastery.


## Monk

Monks are martial mystics. Through mediation and discipline, and
sometimes by way of secrets passed down for generations within a
monastery, a monk progresses toward his perfect self—along the
way turning his body into an astonishing fighting machine. But
though some masters would lead their students to think otherwise,
the path toward the perfect self isn't set. Different monks
confront the road to enlightenment in different ways, and
sometimes even with different goals, from harmony with the
universe to physical perfection and immortality.

The themes and alternate class features presented below introduce
not only variations in fighting techniques, but alternate
philosophies for monks seeking perfection.

Bonus feats marked with asterisks (\*) are found in the feat
section of this book.

### Drunken Master

Most monks lead lives of moderation and quiet contemplation. But
the drunken master finds perfection through excess. Powered by
strong wine, he uses his intoxication to reach a state where his
*ki* is more potent, if somewhat fleeting. A drunken master has
the following class features.

**Drunken *Ki* (Su)**: At 3rd level, a drunken master can drink a
tankard of ale or strong alcohol and gain one temporary *ki*
point. The act of drinking is a standard action that does not
provoke attacks of opportunity. The monk can have a maximum
number of drunken *ki* points equal to 1 plus one additional
point for every two levels thereafter (5th, 7th, and so on). The
monk can gain this temporary *ki* even before he gains a *ki*
pool at 4th level. These drunken *ki* points last for 1 hour or
until spent, whichever is shorter. As long as he has at least 1
drunken *ki* point, the monk can spend 1 *ki* point as a swift
action to move 5 feet without provoking attacks of
opportunity. This ability replaces still mind.

**Drunken Strength (Su)**: At 5th level, a drunken master can
spend 1 point of *ki* as a swift action to inflict 1d6 extra
points of damage on a single successful melee attack. The monk
can choose to apply the damage after the attack roll is made. At
10th level, the monk may spend 2 drunken *ki* points to increase
the extra damage to 2d6. At 15th level, the monk may spend 3
drunken *ki* points to increase the extra damage to 3d6. At 20th
level, the monk may spend 4 drunken *ki* points to increase the
extra damage to 4d6. The monk must have at least 1 drunken *ki*
point to use this ability. This ability replaces purity of body.

**Drunken Courage (Su)**: At 11th level, a drunken master is
immune to fear as long as he has at least 1 point of drunken
*ki*. This ability replaces diamond body.

**Drunken Resilience (Ex)**: At 13th level, a drunken master
gains DR 1/— as long as he has at least 1 point of drunken
*ki*. At 16th level, the DR increases to 2/—. At 19th level, it
increases to 3/—. This ability replaces diamond soul.

**Firewater Breath (Su)**: At 19th level, a drunken master can
take a drink and expel a gout of alcohol-fueled fire in a 30-foot
cone.  Creatures within the cone take 20d6 points of fire
damage. A successful Reflex saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 the monk's
level + the monk's Wis modifier) halves the damage. Using this
ability is a standard action that consumes 4 *ki* points from the
monk's *ki* pool. The monk must have at least 1 drunken *ki*
point to use this ability. This ability replaces empty body.

### Hungry Ghost Monk

The hungry ghost monk looks to spirits that prey upon the living
as models of perfection. He sees the life energy of the universe
as a resource to be manipulated, even stealing it from other
creatures. It is through this constant influx of energy that the
hungry ghost monk reaches his ultimate goal: power—personal,
pure, and simple. A hungry ghost monk has the following class
features.

**[Punishing Kick]) (Ex)**: At 1st level, a hungry ghost monk
gains [Punishing Kick]) as a bonus feat, even if he does not meet
the prerequisites. At 10th level, and every five levels
thereafter, the monk can push the target of his [Punishing Kick])
an additional 5 feet (10 feet at 10th level, 15 feet at 15th
level, and 20 feet at 20th level). At 15th level, he can instead
choose to push the target 5 feet and knock the target prone with
the same attack. The target still gets a saving throw to avoid
being knocked prone. This ability replaces [Stunning Fist].

**Steal *Ki* (Ex)**: At 5th level, a hungry ghost monk can steal
*ki* from other creatures, though this ability is controversial
in some circles of monks, who see it as nothing less than a form
of vampirism.  If the monk scores a confirmed critical hit
against a living enemy or reduces a living enemy to 0 or fewer
hit points, he can steal some of that creature's*ki*. This
ability replenishes 1 spent *ki* point to the monk's *ki* pool,
as long as the monk has at least 1 *ki* point in his pool. He
cannot exceed his *ki* pool's maximum. At 11th level, each time
the monk successfully steals *ki*, he can make an immediate
saving throw against one disease he is suffering from. There is
no penalty for failing this saving throw. The monk gains a bonus
equal to his Wisdom modifier on the saving throw. This ability
replaces purity of body.

**Life Funnel (Su)**: At 7th level, a hungry ghost monk can steal
a creature's life force to replenish his own. If the monk has at
least 1 *ki* point in his *ki* pool and scores a confirmed
critical hit against a living enemy or reduces a living enemy to
0 or fewer hit points, he heals a number of hit points equal to
his monk level. As with steal *ki*, some monks believe that life
funnel is an unsavory act, no better than what the undead do to
the living. A monk with this ability cannot steal both *ki*and
hit points at the same time. This ability replaces wholeness of
body.

**Life from a Stone (Su)**: At 11th level, a hungry ghost monk
*can steal ki* or life force from any creature, not just living
*creatures. If the monk has at least 1 ki point in his pool, he
*gains the benefit of life funnel and steal *ki* when he confirms
*a critical hit against any creature or reduces any creature to 0
*or fewer hit points. This ability replaces diamond body.

**Sipping Demon (Su)**: A 13th level, a hungry ghost monk gains 1
temporary hit point each time he hits an enemy with a melee
attack. The monk gains a number of temporary hit points equal to
his Wisdom modifier when he scores a critical hit. The maximum
number of temporary hit points the monk can have is equal to his
monk level. The temporary hit points disappear 1 hour later. The
monk can only use this ability when he has at least 1 *ki* point
in his *ki* pool. This ability is a proscribed manipulation of
*ki* considered by many good monks to be a corruption. The
ability replaces diamond soul.

### Ki Mystic

The *ki*mystic believes that violence is sometimes necessary, but
knowing and understanding is the true root of perfection. Through
meditation and spiritual visions, a *ki*mystic can see beyond the
veil of reality to the underlying truth of all existence. A
*ki*mystic has the following class features.

***Ki* Mystic (Su)**: At 3rd level, a *ki*mystic gains a pool of
*ki* points equal to his Wisdom modifier. The pool increases to
1/2 his monk level + his Wisdom modifier + 2 at level 4. If the
monk has at least 1 point of *ki* in his *ki* pool, he gains a +2
bonus on all [Knowledge] skill checks. As a swift action, the
monk can spend 1 *ki* point immediately before making an ability,
or skill check to gain a +4 insight bonus on the check. This
ability replaces still mind.

**Mystic Insight (Su)**: At 5th level, a *ki*mystic becomes apt
at giving just the right word of advice in just the nick of
time. As an immediate action, the monk can spend 2 *ki* points to
grant an ally within 30 feet the ability to reroll a single
attack roll or saving throw. The ally must be able to hear the
monk to gain the reroll benefit. This ability replaces purity of
body.

**Mystic Visions (Su)**: At 11th level, a *ki*mystic may receive
mystic visions when he rests. These visions can come as a dream,
an epiphany, or even as the voice of an old friend whispering in
the monk's mind. The effect is similar to a *[Divination]* spell
with a caster level equal to the monk's level. The *[Divination]*
has no casting time; it is just part of the normal dreams or
visions that occur every night. Using this ability costs 2 *ki*
points that are removed from the next day's total. This ability
replaces diamond body.

**Mystic Prescience (Su)**: At 13th level, a *ki*mystic gains a
+2 insight bonus to AC and CMD. At 20th level, the bonus
increases to +4.  This ability replaces diamond soul.

**Mystic Persistence (Su)**: At 19th level, a *ki*mystic can
create an aura once per day as a swift action at the cost of at
least 2 points of *ki.* The aura emanates out to a 20-foot
radius. The monk and all allies within the aura can roll two dice
when making an attack roll or a saving throw and take the better
result. The aura lasts for 1 round, plus an additional round for
every 2 *ki* points spent when the monk created the aura. The
monk can dismiss the aura at any time as a free action, but the
*ki* points for the full duration of the aura are lost. This
ability replaces empty body.

### Monk of the Empty Hand

The monk of the empty hand eschews normal weapons in favor of
whatever is lying around—rocks, chair legs, flagons of ale, even
a simple quill pen all become deadly weapons in the hands of such
a monk. A monk of the empty hand draws on his own *ki* to infuse
his improvised weapons with power, and can transform a broken
bottle into a magical weapon.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency**: Monks of the empty hand are
proficient with the shuriken only. A monk of the empty hand
treats normal weapons as improvised weapons with the following
equivalencies (substituting all of their statistics for the
listed weapon): a light weapon functions as a light hammer, a
one-handed weapon functions as a club, and a two-handed weapon
functions as a quarterstaff. This replaces the normal monk weapon
proficiencies.

**Flurry of Blows (Ex)**: Starting at 1st level, a monk of the
empty hand can make a flurry of blows using any combination of
unarmed strikes or attacks with an improvised weapon. He may not
make a flurry of blows with any other weapons, including special
monk weapons. A monk of the empty hand's flurry of blows
otherwise functions as normal for a monk of his level.

**Bonus Feat**: A monk of the empty hand adds the following feats
to his list of bonus feats at 6th level: [Improved Dirty
Trick]\*), [Improved Steal]\*), and [Improvised Weapon Mastery].

**Versatile Improvisation (Ex)**: At 3rd level, as a swift
action, a monk of the empty hand may use an improvised weapon to
deal damage as if it were another type (bludgeoning, piercing, or
slashing) for 1 round, regardless of the weapon's normal damage
type. This ability replaces still mind.

***Ki* Pool (Su)**: At 4th level, in addition to the normal
abilities of his *ki* pool, a monk of the empty hand may spend 1
point from his *ki* pool to increase the range increment for an
improvised thrown weapon or shuriken by 20 feet for 1 round.

***Ki* Weapons (Su)**: At 5th level, a monk of the empty hand may
spend 1 point from his *ki* pool as a swift action to deal damage
equal to his unarmed strike damage with an improvised weapon for
1 round. At 11th level, the monk may spend *ki* to grant an
enhancement bonus or magical weapon abilities to an improvised
weapon for 1 round, at the rate of 1 point of *ki* per +1 bonus
or its equivalent. The monk may not spend more than 3 points of
*ki* at one time for this purpose. For example, a monk can spend
2 points of *ki* to give his improvised weapon a +1 enhancement
bonus and the *[Ki Focus]* quality, or just the *[Flaming Burst]*
quality.  At 15th level, the limit increases to 5 *ki* per
round. The monk may use this ability to add magical weapon
qualities to improvised weapons that could not normally have such
a quality, such as adding the *[Disruption]* quality to a
slashing weapon, or the *[Vorpal]* quality to a bludgeoning
weapon. This ability replaces purity of body and diamond body.

### Monk of the Four Winds

The monk of the four winds is connected to the natural world in a
way few other creatures—even other monks—can hope to match. He
can call upon the elements and the spirits of the world in times
of need, and as he nears his goal of perfection, he gains the
ability to slow down time and even defeat death itself. A monk of
the four winds has the following class features.

**[Elemental Fist]) (Su)**: At 1st level, a monk of the four
winds gains [Elemental Fist]) as a bonus feat, even if he does
not meet the prerequisites. At 5th level, and every five levels
thereafter, the monk increases the damage of his [Elemental
Fist]) by 1d6 (2d6 at 5th level, 3d6 at 10th level, and so
on). This ability replaces [Stunning Fist].

**Slow Time (Su)**: At 12th level, a monk of the four winds can
use his ki* to slow time or quicken his movements, depending on
the observer.  As a swift action, the monk can expend 6 *ki*
points to gain three standard actions during his turn instead of
just one. The monk can use these actions to do the following:
take a melee attack action, use a skill, use an extraordinary
ability, or take a move action. The monk cannot use these actions
to cast spells or use spell-like abilities, and cannot combine
them to take full-attack actions. Any move actions the monk makes
this turn do not provoke attacks of opportunity. This ability
replaces abundant step.

**Aspect Master (Su)**: At 17th level, a monk of the four winds
must choose an aspect of one of the great spirits of the
world. Once made, this choice cannot be changed. This spirit
grants the monk a new appearance and new abilities, as well as
changing or augmenting the monk's personality in some way. Once
this choice is made, it cannot be changed. The monk must abide by
the alignment restrictions of the aspect. If the monk ever
changes his alignment to something outside the aspect's alignment
restrictions, he loses this ability and cannot regain it unless
his alignment later changes again to match that of the aspect.
This ability replaces timeless body.

*Aspect of the Carp*: The monk's skin becomes a coat of golden,
iridescent fish scales, his neck grows gills, and his fingers
become webbed. He can breathe water and gains a swim speed equal
to his land speed. The carp is heroic and adventurous—a monk must
be nonevil to take on the aspect of the carp.

*Aspect of the Ki-Rin*: The monk's skin takes on a golden
luminescence, and a silvery mane that cannot be bound grows atop
his head. He gains a fly speed equal to his land speed, but he
must end each turn on the ground. If the monk does not land by
the end of his turn, he falls from whatever height he has
attained. The ki-rin is honorable, honest, and self-sacrificing—a
monk must be lawful good to take on the aspect of the ki-rin.

*Aspect of the Monkey*: The monk's face becomes that of a monkey,
and he grows a prehensile tail. The monk can pick up objects and
make unarmed attacks with his tail (though the tail does not
grant additional unarmed attacks or natural attacks). In
addition, the monk gains a climb speed equal to his land
speed. The monkey is a creature of whimsy and a lover of pranks—a
monk of any alignment can take on the aspect of the monkey.

*Aspect of the Oni*: The monk's skin becomes pitch black, and his
hair turns white, black, red, or violet. He can assume *[Gaseous
Form]* (as the spell) as a standard action for 1 minute per day
per monk level. This duration does not need to be consecutive,
but it must be spent in 1-minute increments.  The oni is
treacherous and deceitful, and it hungers for the pain and death
of living creatures—a monk must be evil to take on the aspect of
the oni.

*Aspect of the Owl*: The monk grows feathers, and his head
becomes avian, with wide, unblinking eyes. He gains a fly speed
of 30 feet. The owl is a sage creature, deeply serious, and
driven toward a single goal—a monk of any alignment can take on
the aspect of the owl.

*Aspect of the Tiger*: Dark stripes appear on the monk's skin,
and his face becomes more feline. His eyes become catlike, with
vertical pupils, and his canines enlarge. Once per hour, the monk
can move at 10 times his normal land speed when he makes a charge
and is treated as if he had the pounce ability. The tiger is
swift, fierce, and deadly—a monk of any alignment can take on the
aspect of the tiger.

**Immortality (Su)**: At 20th level, a monk of the four winds no
longer ages. He remains in his current age category forever. Even
if the monk comes to a violent end, he spontaneously
*reincarnates*(as the spell) 24 hours later in a place of his
choosing within 20 miles of the place he died. The monk must have
visited the place in which he returns back to life at least
once. This ability replaces perfect self.

### Monk of the Healing Hand

Monks of the healing hand seek perfection through helping
others. By focusing their meditations on the flow of life within
themselves and all creation they gain an understanding of how to
share their *ki* with others, healing wounds and even bringing
the dead back to life. For such a monk, sacrificing himself to
save another is the surest way to achieve transcendence. A monk
of the healing hand has the following class features.

**Ancient Healing Hand (Su)**: At 7th level, a monk of the
healing hand can heal another creature's wounds with a touch. As
a full-round action, the monk can spend 2 *ki* points to heal a
number of hit points equal to the monk's level. He needs at least
one hand free to use this ability, and cannot heal himself. If
the action is interrupted, the subject heals no hit points, and
the *ki* points are lost. This ability replaces wholeness of
body.

***Ki* Sacrifice (Su)**: At 11th level, a monk of the healing
hand can use his entire *ki* pool to bring a person back to
life. It takes 1 hour to perform this ritual. At the end of the
ritual, the monk sacrifices all of his*ki*in order to cast
*[Raise Dead]* (as the spell) with a caster level equal to his
monk level. The ritual uses all of the *ki* in the monk's *ki*
pool; the monk must have at least 6 points of *ki* in his *ki*
pool to use this ability. At 15th level, the monk may sacrifice
his *ki* to cast *[Resurrection]*. The monk must have at least 8
points of *ki* in his *ki* pool to use this ability. These
rituals do not require material components. When this ability is
used, the monk's *ki* pool is not replenished until 24 hours have
passed. This ability replaces both diamond body and quivering
palm.

**True Sacrifice (Su)**: At 20th level, in a final selfless act,
a monk of the healing hand can draw in his entire *ki*, which
then explodes outward in a 50-foot-radius emanation. All dead
allies within the emanation are brought back to life, as if they
were the subject of a *[True Resurrection]* spell with a caster
level equal to the monk's level. When the monk does this, he is
truly and utterly destroyed. A monk destroyed in this way can
never come back to life, not even by way of a *[Wish]* or
*[Miracle]* spell or by the power of a deity. Furthermore, the
monk's name can never be spoken or written down again. All
written mentions of his name become nothing more than a blank
space. This ability replaces perfect self.

### Monk of the Lotus

Monks are warriors who hone their bodies into deadly weapons, but
some monks eschew violence in favor of a more peaceful
philosophy. While a monk of the lotus realizes that combat cannot
always be avoided—and is more than capable in a fight—he
understands that all creatures are connected, and to harm another
is to harm the self. Instead, he strives to find peaceful
resolutions to conflicts, and in doing so, hopes to achieve inner
peace. A monk of the lotus has the following class features.

**[Touch of Serenity]) (Su)**: At 1st level, a monk of the lotus
gains [Touch of Serenity]) as a bonus feat, even if he does not
meet the prerequisites. At 6th level, and every six levels
thereafter, the duration of [Touch of Serenity]) increases by 1
round. Each round on its turn, the target may attempt a new Will
save to end the effect. This duration does not stack; only the
longest remaining duration applies. This ability replaces
[Stunning Fist].

**Touch of Surrender (Su)**: At 12th level, a monk of the lotus
makes a foe into a friend with a single show of mercy. As an
immediate action, when one of his melee attacks would reduce a
creature to 0 or fewer hit points, the monk can spend 6 *ki*
points to make the target of that attack surrender. When the
target surrenders, it is reduced to 0 hit points, becomes
disabled, and is charmed, as if the monk had cast *[Charm
Monster]* with a caster level equal to the monk's level. The
target does not get a saving throw against this effect. This
charm lasts until its duration expires, until the monk dismisses
it or uses it on another creature, or until the target is again
reduced to 0 or fewer hit points, whichever happens first. The
monk can only have one creature charmed with touch of surrender
at a time. This is a mind-affecting charm effect. This ability
replaces abundant step.

**Touch of Peace (Su)**: At 15th level, a monk of the lotus can
set up vibrations within the body of another creature to win over
the creature's mind. The monk can use touch of peace once per
day, and must announce his intent before making his attack
roll. On a successful hit, the attack deals no damage, but the
target is charmed as if the monk had cast *[Charm Monster]* with
a caster level equal to the monk's level. The target does not get
a saving throw against this effect. The creature is charmed for 1
day per level. If the monk or his allies attack the charmed
creature, or if the monk asks or commands the charmed creature to
take hostile actions, the effect ends. This is a mind-affecting
charm effect. This ability replaces quivering palm.

**Learned Master (Ex)**: At 17th level, a monk of the lotus gains
all [Knowledge] skills and the [Linguistics] skill as class
skills. The monk uses Wisdom instead of Intelligence as the key
ability for these skills. This ability replaces tongue of the sun
and the moon.

### Monk of the Sacred Mountain

The monk of the sacred mountain finds strength and power in the
earth beneath his feet. Rather than spinning though the
battlefield with the fluid motion of the river, he roots himself
to the ground, as immovable and unshakable as the stones of the
mountain. A monk of the sacred mountain has the following class
features.

**Iron Monk (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a monk of the sacred mountain
gains [Toughness] as a bonus feat. In addition, the monk gains a
+1 natural armor bonus. This ability replaces evasion.

**Bastion Stance (Ex)**: At 4th level, a monk of the sacred
mountain becomes like stone, nearly impossible to move when he
stands his ground.  If the monk starts and ends his turn in the
same space, he cannot be knocked prone or forcibly moved until
the start of his next turn, except by mind-affecting or
teleportation effects. At 16th level, he is immune to any
attempts to force him to move, even mind-affecting and
teleportation effects. This ability replaces slow fall.

**Iron Limb Defense (Ex)**: At 5th level, a monk of the sacred
mountain can deflect blows with an active defense that
complements his bastion stance. If the monk starts and ends his
turn in the same space, he gains a +2 shield bonus to AC and CMD
until the start of his next turn. As a swift action, he can spend
1 *ki* point to increase this bonus to +4.  This ability replaces
high jump.

**Adamantine Monk (Ex)**: At 9th level, a monk of the sacred
mountain has muscles so strong and skin so resilient that he
gains DR 1/—. This DR increases by 1 for every three levels
thereafter. As a swift action, the monk can spend 1 *ki* point to
double his DR until the beginning of his next turn. This ability
replaces improved evasion.

**Vow of Silence (Su)**: At 17th level, a monk of the sacred
mountain becomes as impassive as stone, making a vow of silence
in exchange for greater abilities. The monk gains a +2 insight
bonus to AC and CMD and a +4 bonus on [Sense Motive], [Stealth],
and [Perception] checks. The monk does not lose the capacity for
speech, but if he ever speaks, he loses this feature for 24
hours. This ability replaces tongue of the sun and the moon.

### Weapon Adept

While all monks train in both unarmed combat and with weapons,
the weapon adept seeks to become one with his weapons,
transforming them into perfect extensions of his own
body. Through such training, a weapon adept seeks to attain
perfection by becoming a living weapon himself. A weapon adept
has the following class features.

**[Perfect Strike]) (Ex)**: At 1st level, a weapon adept gains
[Perfect Strike]) as a bonus feat, even if he does not meet the
prerequisites. At 10th level, the monk can roll his attack roll
three times and take the higher result. If one of these rolls is
a critical threat, he can choose which one of his other two rolls
to use as his confirmation roll. This ability replaces [Stunning
Fist].

**Way of the Weapon Master (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a weapon adept
gains [Weapon Focus] as a bonus feat with one of his monk
weapons. At 6th level, the monk gains [Weapon Specialization]
with the same weapon as a bonus feat, even if he does not meet
the prerequisites. This ability replaces evasion.

**Evasion (Ex)**: At 9th level, the monk gains evasion. This
ability replaces improved evasion.

**Uncanny Initiative (Ex)**: At 17th level, a weapon adept does
not need to roll for initiative. He always treats his initiative
roll as if it resulted in any number of his choosing (from 1 to
20). This ability replaces timeless body.

**Pure Power**: At 20th level, a weapon adept forsakes the ideals
of the perfect self to become a bastion of the physical and
mental virtues monks hold dear. The monk gains a +2 bonus to
Strength, Dexterity, and Wisdom. This ability replaces perfect
self.

### Zen Archer

Some monks seek to become one with another weapon entirely—the
bow. The zen archer takes a weapon most other monks eschew and
seeks perfection in the pull of a taut bowstring, the flex of a
bow's limbs, and the flight of an arrow fired true.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency**: Zen archers are proficient with
longbows, shortbows, composite longbows, and composite shortbows
in addition to their normal weapon proficiencies.

**Flurry of Blows (Ex)**: Starting at 1st level, a zen archer can
make a flurry of blows as a full-attack action, but only when
using a bow (even though it is a ranged weapon). He may not make
a flurry of blows with his unarmed attacks or any other
weapons. A zen archer does not apply his Strength bonus on damage
rolls made with flurry of blows unless he is using a composite
bow with a Strength rating. A zen archer's flurry of blows
otherwise functions as normal for a monk of his level.

A zen archer cannot use [Rapid Shot] or [Manyshot] when making a
flurry of blows with his bow.

**Bonus Feats**: A zen archer's bonus feats must be taken from
the following list: [Combat Reflexes], [Deflect Arrows], [Dodge],
[Far Shot], [Point-Blank Shot], [Precise Shot], and [Rapid
Shot]. At 6th level, the following feats are added to the list:
[Focused Shot]\*), [Improved Precise Shot], [Manyshot],
[Mobility], and [Parting Shot]\*). At 10th level, the following
feats are added to the list: [Improved Critical], Pinpoint
Targeting, [Shot on the Run], and [Snatch Arrows]. A monk need
not have any of the prerequisites normally required for these
feats to select them.  These feats replace the monk's normal
bonus feats.

**[Perfect Strike]) (Ex)**: At 1st level, a zen archer gains
[Perfect Strike]) as a bonus feat, even if he does not meet the
prerequisites. A zen archer can use [Perfect Strike]) with any
bow. At 10th level, the monk can roll his attack roll three times
and take the highest result. If one of these rolls is a critical
threat, the monk must choose one of his other two rolls to use as
his confirmation roll. This ability replaces [Stunning Fist].

**Way of the Bow (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a zen archer gains [Weapon
Focus] as a bonus feat with one type of bow. At 6th level, the
monk gains [Weapon Specialization] with the same weapon as a
bonus feat, even if he does not meet the prerequisites. This
ability replaces evasion.

**Zen Archery (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a zen archer may use his
Wisdom modifier instead of his Dexterity modifier on ranged
attack rolls when using a bow. This ability replaces maneuver
training.

**[Point Blank Master]) (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a zen archer gains
[Point Blank Master]\*) as a bonus feat, even if he does not meet
the prerequisites. This ability replaces still mind.

***Ki* Pool (Su)**: At 4th level, in addition to the normal
abilities of his *ki* pool, a zen archer may spend 1 point from
his *ki* pool to increase the range increment for his bow by 50
feet for 1 round.

***Ki* Arrows (Su)**: At 5th level, a zen archer may spend 1
point from his *ki* pool as a swift action to change the damage
dice of arrows he shoots to that of his unarmed strikes. This
lasts until the start of his next turn. For example, a Medium zen
archer's short bow normally deals 1d6 damage; using this ability,
his arrows deal 1d8 damage until the start of his next turn. This
ability replaces purity of body.

**Reflexive Shot (Ex)**: At 9th level, a zen archer can make
attacks of opportunity with arrows from his bow. The monk still
threatens squares he could reach with unarmed strikes, and can
still only make one attack of opportunity per round (unless he
has [Combat Reflexes]). This ability replaces improved evasion.

**Trick Shot (Su)**: At 11th level, a zen archer may hit targets
that he might otherwise miss. By spending 1 point from his *ki*
pool as a swift action, the zen archer can ignore concealment. By
spending 2 points, he can ignore total concealment or cover. By
spending 3 points, he can ignore total cover, even firing arrows
around corners. The arrow must still be able to reach the target;
a target inside a closed building with no open doors or windows
cannot be attacked. These effects last for 1 round. This ability
replaces diamond body.

***Ki Focus* Bow (Su)**: At 17th level, as long as he has at
least 1 point of *ki* in his *ki* pool, a zen archer may treat
arrows fired from his bow as if they were *[ki focus]* weapons,
allowing him to use his special *ki* attacks as if his arrows
were unarmed attacks. This ability replaces tongue of the sun and
moon.


## Paladin

Holy warriors and defenders of the faith, paladins know that the
only thing more abhorrent than an evil creature is a
fundamentally good creature too timid to strive against the
forces of darkness. Paladins are divine champions, gladly giving
their lives in the service of light and justice, asking only that
they may protect the innocent and cleanse the world to the best
of their ability. Theirs is a hard path, requiring great
sacrifice and ultimate devotion to a moral code, yet with her
last breath a paladin can take comfort in a life of absolute
righteousness.

Presented below are several variant class features to help flesh
out common paladin archetypes, the better to customize characters
for fighting the good fight.

### Divine Defender

Some paladins see themselves as the last line of defense between
the teeming hordes of evil and the innocent folk trying to make a
living in a harsh, unforgiving world. These defenders spend their
lives protecting others and taking on foes that the common man
should not even know exist. To aid them in their holy mission,
they have special powers to protect themselves and those around
them. The divine defender has the following class features.

**Shared Defense (Su)**: At 3rd level, a divine defender can
spend one use of her lay on hands ability as a standard action to
grant all adjacent allies (including paladins) a bonus. At 3rd
level, adjacent allies receive a +1 sacred bonus to their AC and
CMD and on their saving throws. These bonuses last for a number
of rounds equal to the divine defender's Charisma modifier. At
9th level and 15th level, this bonus increases by +1. At 6th
level, these bonuses are granted to all allies within 10 feet,
and allies that are at fewer than 0 hit points within this area
are automatically stabilized. At 12th level, these bonuses are
granted to all allies within 15 feet, and allies within this area
are immune to bleed damage. At 18th level, these bonuses are
granted to all allies within 20 feet, and allies within this area
gain a 25% chance to negate any sneak attack or critical hit
scored against them. This ability does not stack with the chance
provided from the light, medium, or heavy *[Fortification]* armor
special abilities. These bonuses are cumulative with each other.
Allies only benefit from these bonuses while in the listed
area. This ability replaces mercy.

**Divine Bond (Su)**: At 5th level, instead of forming a divine
bond with her weapon or a mount, a divine defender can form a
bond with her armor. As a standard action, a divine defender can
enhance her armor by calling upon the aid of a celestial
spirit. This bond lasts for 1 minute per paladin level. When
called, the spirit causes the armor to shed light like a
torch. At 5th level, the spirit grants the armor a +1 enhancement
bonus. For every three levels beyond 5th, the armor gains another
+1 enhancement bonus, to a maximum of +6 at 20th level. These
bonuses can be added to the armor, stacking with existing armor
bonuses to a maximum of +3, or they can be used to add any of the
following armor properties (asterisks note new armor properties
found in Chapter 7): *[Champion]*\*, *[Ghost Touch], Heavy
[Fortification], [Invulnerability], [Light] [Fortification],
Moderate [Fortification], [Spell Resistance]*(13, 15, 17, or
19). Adding these properties consumes an amount of bonus equal to
the property's cost (see Table 15-4 of the *Core Rulebook*). In
addition, the bonuses can be consumed at the listed amount to add
any of the following armor properties: *[Energy Resistance]*for
+3 bonus, *improved [Energy Resistance]* for +5 bonus, or
*[Righteous]*\* for +4 bonus. These bonuses are added to any
properties the armor already has, but duplicate abilities do not
stack. If the armor is not magical, at least a +1 enhancement
bonus must be added before any other properties can be added. The
bonus and properties granted by the spirit are determined when
the spirit is called and cannot be changed until the spirit is
called again. The celestial spirit imparts no bonuses if the
armor is worn by anyone other than the divine defender, but it
resumes giving bonuses if the divine defender dons the armor
again. A divine defender can use this ability once per day at 5th
level, and one additional time per day for every four levels
beyond 5th, to a total of four times per day at 17th level.

If a suit of armor with a celestial spirit is destroyed, the
divine defender loses the use of this ability for 30 days, or
until she gains a level, whichever comes first. During this
30-day period, the divine defender takes a -1 penalty on attack
and weapon damage rolls.

### Hospitaler

Paladins are known for their charity and for tending to the
sick. The hospitaler takes to this calling above all others,
spending much of her time healing the poor, and giving aid and
succor to those in need. The hospitaler has the following class
features.

**Smite Evil (Su)**: This functions as the paladin ability, but
the hospitaler can smite evil one additional time per day at 7th
level, and every six levels thereafter (instead of 4th level and
every three levels thereafter).

**Channel Positive Energy (Su)**: When a hospitaler reaches 4th
level, she gains the ability to channel positive energy as a
cleric equal to her paladin level -3. She can use this ability a
number of times per day equal to 3 + her Charisma modifier. Using
this ability does not expend uses of lay on hands, as it does
with other paladins. This replaces the standard paladin's channel
positive energy ability.

**Aura of Healing (Su)**: At 11th level, a hospitaler can expend
one use of her channel positive energy ability to emit a 30-foot
aura of healing for a number of rounds equal to her paladin
level. Allies in this aura (including the hospitaler)
automatically stabilize if below 0 hit points and are immune to
bleed damage. In addition, allies (including the paladin) that
spend at least 1 full round inside the aura are healed an amount
of damage equal to their total number of Hit Dice and may make a
saving throw against any afflictions they are suffering from,
such as a curse, disease, or poison. This saving throw only
counts toward curing the affliction and does not impose any
penalty on a failed save. Allies can only be healed once by a use
of this ability and they can only attempt additional saving
throws once per day, even if they are exposed to this aura
multiple times. This ability replaces aura of justice.

### Sacred Servant

Paladins as a general rule, venerate the gods of good and purity,
but some take this a step further, dedicating themselves to a
specific deity and furthering the cause of the faith. These
sacred servants are rewarded for their devotion with additional
spells and powerful allies.  A sacred servant must select one
deity to worship. This deity's alignment must be lawful good,
lawful neutral, or neutral good. A sacred servant has the
following class features.

**Smite Evil (Su)**: This functions as the paladin ability, but
the sacred servant can smite evil one additional time per day at
7th level, and every six levels thereafter (instead of 4th level
and every three levels thereafter). This replaces smite evil.

**Spells**: At 4th level, when a sacred servant gains the ability
to cast spells, she also chooses one domain associated with her
deity. Her effective cleric level for this domain is equal to her
paladin level -3.  In addition, she also gains one domain spell
slot for each level of paladin spells she can cast. Every day she
must prepare the domain spell from her chosen domain in that
spell slot.

**Divine Bond (Su)**: At 5th level, instead of forming a divine
bond with her weapon or a mount, a sacred servant forms a bond
with her holy symbol. As a standard action, a sacred servant can
bind a celestial spirit to her holy symbol for 1 minute per
paladin level. When called, the spirit causes the sacred
servant's holy symbol to shed light like a torch. At 5th level,
the spirit grants one bonus. For every three levels beyond 5th,
the spirit grants one additional bonus. These bonuses can be
spent in a number of ways to grant the paladin enhanced abilities
to channel positive energy and to cast spells. Each bonus can be
used to grant one of the following enhancements: +1 caster level
to any paladin spell cast, +1 to the DC to halve the damage of
channel positive energy when used to harm undead, +1d6 to channel
positive energy, +1 use/day of lay on hands. These enhancements
stack and can be selected multiple times. The enhancements
granted by the spirit are determined when the spirit is called
and cannot be changed until the spirit is called again.  If the
sacred servant increases her number of uses of lay on hands per
day in this way, that choice is set for the rest of the day, and
once used, these additional uses are not restored (even if the
spirit is called again that day). The celestial spirit imparts no
enhancements if the holy symbol is held by anyone other than the
sacred servant, but resumes giving enhancements if returned to
the sacred servant. A sacred servant can use this ability once
per day at 5th level, and one additional time per day for every
four levels beyond 5th, to a total of four times per day at 17th
level.

If a holy symbol with a celestial spirit is destroyed, the sacred
servant loses the use of this ability for 30 days, or until she
gains a level, whichever comes first. During this 30-day period,
the sacred servant takes a -1 penalty on attack and weapon damage
rolls.

**Call Celestial Ally (Sp)**: At 8th level, a sacred servant can
call upon her deity for aid, in the form of a powerful
servant. This allows the sacred servant to cast *[Lesser Planar
Ally]* once per week as a spell-like ability without having to
pay the material component cost or the servant (for reasonable
tasks). At 12th level, this improves to *[Planar Ally]* and at
16th level, this improves to *[Greater Planar Ally]*. The sacred
servant's caster level for this effect is equal to her paladin
level.  This ability replaces aura of resolve.

### Shining Knight

While paladins often are seen mounted atop a loyal steed, the
shining knight is the true symbol of mounted bravery. They are
never far from their steeds and are always clad in brightly
polished armor. The shining knight has the following class
features.

**Skilled Rider (Ex and Su)**: At 3rd level, a shining knight
does not take any penalty to her [Ride] skill due to her armor
check penalty. In addition, any mount she is riding gains the
benefit of her divine grace class feature, adding her Charisma
bonus (if any) to its saving throws. This ability replaces divine
health.

**Divine Bond (Su)**: Upon reaching 5th level, a shining knight
must form a bond with a mount. This ability otherwise functions
as the paladin ability.

**Knight's Charge (Su)**: At 11th level, whenever a mounted
shining knight charges a foe, her movement does not provoke
attacks of opportunity, for either her or her mount. In addition,
if her target is also the target of her smite evil ability and
the charge attack hits, the target must make a Will save or be
panicked for a number of rounds equal to 1/2 the shining knight's
level. The DC of this save is equal to 10 + 1/2 the shining
knight's level + the shining knight's Charisma modifier. This
ability replaces aura of justice.

### Undead Scourge

Undead are an abomination in the eyes of the just and
righteous. It is no surprise then that there are some paladins
that dedicate themselves to wiping these unholy terrors from the
world. The following are the class features of the undead
scourge.

**Smite Evil (Su)**: This functions as the paladin ability of the
same name, but the undead scourge does not deal 2 points of
damage per level on the first successful attack against evil
dragons and evil outsiders.  She does deal 2 points of damage per
level on all smite attacks made against evil undead creatures.

**Aura of Life (Su)**: At 8th level, an undead scourge emits a
10-foot aura of life around her that weakens undead
creatures. Undead in this aura take a -4 penalty on Will saves
made to resist positive energy. In addition, undead in this aura
do not regain hit points from channeled negative energy. This
ability replaces aura of resolve.

**Undead Annihilation (Su)**: At 11th level, an undead scourge
can expend one use of her smite evil ability as a standard action
and make a single melee attack against an undead creature. If
this attack hits, the undead creature must make a Will save or be
destroyed. The save DC is equal to 10 + 1/2 the undead scourge's
level + the undead scourge's Charisma modifier. Undead with twice
as many Hit Dice as the undead scourge are unaffected by this
ability. If the attack misses, the smite evil is wasted without
effect. This ability replaces aura of justice.

### Warrior of the Holy Light

Some paladins use their gifts to focus on the holy light that
shines within their souls. With the gifts of purity and
redemption, these paladins spend much of their lives helping
others find the true path.  Unleashing this power takes patience
and comes at a steep price.  Warriors of the holy light have the
following class features.

**Power of Faith (Su)**: At 4th level, a warrior of the holy
light learns to use the power of her faith to bolster her
defenses and aid her allies. This class feature replaces the
paladin's spells class feature.  A warrior of the holy light does
not gain any spells or spellcasting abilities, does not have a
caster level, and cannot use spell trigger or spell completion
magic items.

At 4th level, the warrior of the holy light gains one additional
use of her lay on hands ability per day. She gains one additional
use of lay on hands per day for every four levels she attains
beyond 4th. She can spend a use of her lay on hands ability to
call upon the power of her faith as a standard action. This
causes a nimbus of *[Light]* to emanate from the warrior of the
holy light in a 30-foot radius. All allies in this area
(including the warrior of the holy light) receive a +1 morale
bonus to AC and on attack rolls, damage rolls, and saving throws
against fear as long as they remain in the area of light. This
power lasts for 1 minute.

At 8th level, the nimbus of light heals the paladin and her
allies, curing of them of 1d4 points of ability damage, as per
the spell *[Lesser Restoration]*. A creature can only be healed
in this way once per day.

At 12th level, the nimbus of light is treated as *[Daylight]* for
the purposes of affecting creatures with sensitivity to light. In
addition, the nimbus grants the warrior of the holy light and her
allies in the area resistance 10 to one type of energy, selected
by the warrior of the holy light when this power is activated.

At 16th level, the nimbus of light grants the warrior of the holy
light and her allies protection from critical hits. There is a
25% chance that critical hits made against the warrior of the
holy light and her allies in the area are instead treated as
normal hits. This does not stack with other abilities that grant
similar protection (such as *[Light] [Fortification]*).

At 20th level, the nimbus of light increases in size out to a
range of 60 feet. In addition, all of its bonuses increase. The
morale bonus to AC and on attack rolls, damage rolls, and saving
throws against fear increases to +2. The amount of ability damage
healed increases to 2d4.  The energy resistance increases to 20
against one energy type. Finally, protection against critical
hits increases to 50%.

**Shining Light (Su)**: At 14th level, a warrior of the holy
light can unleash a 30-foot burst of pure, white light as a
standard action. Evil creatures within this burst take 1d6 points
of damage for every two paladin levels and are blinded for 1
round. Evil dragons, evil outsiders, and evil undead are blinded
for 1d4 rounds on a failed save.  A Reflex save halves this
damage and negates the blindness. The DC of this save is equal to
10 + 1/2 the warrior of the holy light's level + the warrior of
the holy light's Charisma modifier. Good creatures within this
burst are healed 1d6 points of damage per two paladin levels and
receive a +2 sacred bonus on ability checks, attack rolls, saving
throws, and skill checks for 1 round. A warrior of the holy light
can use this ability once per day at 14th level plus one
additional time per day at 17th and 20th levels. This ability
replaces aura of faith.

#### Antipaladin (Alternate Class)


*Not all paladins that fall become antipaladins. In fact, the
 transformation is quite rare. Most paladins spend months or even
 years regaining their paladinhood, but they never stray so far
 from the path as to become irredeemable. Rarely, a paladin turns
 from the light and seeks instead to make a pact with the dark
 powers. Often this is through temptation or some sort of ruse,
 but once the deal is struck, the paladin finds himself on the
 path to damnation.*

*When such a fall occurs, the transformation can be swift. The
 paladin trades in all of his paladin levels for antipaladin
 levels on a 1-for-1 basis. This is usually a traumatic
 experience, involving a complex ritual that involves a living
 sacrifice and dark oaths made to foul powers (who sometimes send
 minions to bear witness). Once complete, the anitpaladin
 emerges, ready to bring ruin to the world.*

*It should be noted that not all antipaladins are fallen
 heroes. Some warriors are trained from a young age to assume the
 mantle of antipaladin, forged through pain and trauma into
 exemplars of evil. These cruel warriors know nothing of
 compassion or loyalty, but they can teach a great deal about
 pain and suffering.*

Although it is a rare occurrence, paladins do sometimes stray
from the path of righteousness. Most of these wayward holy
warriors seek out redemption and forgiveness for their misdeeds,
regaining their powers through piety, charity, and powerful
magic. Yet there are others, the dark and disturbed few, who turn
actively to evil, courting the dark powers they once railed
against in order to take vengeance on their former brothers. It's
said that those who climb the farthest have the farthest to fall,
and antipaladins are living proof of this fact, their pride and
hatred blinding them to the glory of their forsaken patrons.

Antipaladins become the antithesis of their former selves. They
make pacts with fiends, take the lives of the innocent, and put
nothing ahead of their personal power and wealth. Champions of
evil, they often lead armies of evil creatures and work with
other villains to bring ruin to the holy and tyranny to the
weak. Not surprisingly, paladins stop at nothing to put an end to
such nefarious antiheroes.

The antipaladin is an alternate class. Making use of and altering
numerous facets of the paladin core class, this villainous
warrior can't truly be considered a new character class by its
own right. By the changes made here, though, the details and
tones of the paladin class are shifted in a completely opposite
direction and captures an entirely different fantasy theme,
without needlessly designing an entire new class. While a
redesign of sorts, this alternate class can be used just as any
of the other base classes found in the first part of this
chapter.

**Role**: Antipaladins are villains at their most dangerous. They
care nothing for the lives of others and actively seek to bring
death and destruction to ordered society. They rarely travel with
those that they do not subjugate, unless as part of a ruse to
bring ruin from within.

As an alternate paladin class, the antipaladin uses [Table:
Antipaladin] to determine its base attack bonus, saving throw
bonuses, and spells per day. These details, along with the
class's new special abilities, can be found on Table 2-13.

**Alignment**: Chaotic evil.

**Hit Die**: d10.

##### Class Skills

The antipaladin's class skills are [Bluff] (Cha), [Craft] (Int),
[Disguise] (Cha), [Handle Animal] (Cha), [Intimidate] (Cha),
[Knowledge] (religion) (Int), [Profession] (Wis), [Ride] (Dex),
[Sense Motive] (Wis), [Spellcraft] (Int), and [Stealth] (Dex).

**Skill Ranks per Level**: 2 + Int modifier.

Table: Antipaladin

+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|Level|Base Attack Bonus|Fort Save|Ref Save |Will Save|
+=====+=================+=========+=========+=========+
|1st  |+1               |+2       |+0       |+2       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|2nd  |                 |+3       |+0       |+3       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|3rd  |+3               |+3       |+1       |+3       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|4th  |+4               |+4       |+1       |+4       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|5th  |+5               |+4       |+1       |+4       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|6th  |+6/+1            |+5       |+2       |+5       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|7th  |+7/+2            |+5       |+2       |+5       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|8th  |+8/+3            |+6       |+2       |+6       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|9th  |+9/+4            |+6       |+3       |+6       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|10th |+10/+5           |+7       |+3       |+7       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|11th |+11/+6/+1        |+7       |+3       |+7       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|12th |+12/+7/+2        |+8       |+4       |+8       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|13th |+13/+8/+3        |+8       |+4       |+8       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|14th |+14/+9/+4        |+9       |+4       |+9       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|15th |+15/+10/+5       |+9       |+5       |+9       |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|16th |+16/+11/+6/+1    |+10      |+5       |+10      |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|17th |+17/+12/+7/+2    |+10      |+5       |+10      |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|18th |+18/+13/+8/+3    |+11      |+6       |+11      |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|19th |+19/+14/+9/+4    |+11      |+6       |+11      |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+
|20th |+20/+15/+10/+5   |+12      |+6       |+12      |
+-----+-----------------+---------+---------+---------+

+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|Level|Special                           |1st |2nd |3rd |4th |
+=====+==================================+====+====+====+====+
|1st  |[Aura of Evil]*,*[Detect Good],   |N/A |N/A |N/A |N/A |
|     |[Smite Good] 1/day                |    |    |    |    |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|2nd  |[Touch of Corruption], [Unholy    |N/A |N/A |N/A |N/A |
|     |Resilience]                       |    |    |    |    |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|3rd  |[Aura of Cowardice], [Cruelty],   |N/A |N/A |N/A |N/A |
|     |[Plague Bringer]                  |    |    |    |    |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|4th  |[Channel Negative Energy], [Smite |0   |N/A |N/A |N/A |
|     |Good] 2/day                       |    |    |    |    |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|5th  |[Fiendish boon]                   |1   |N/A |N/A |N/A |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|6th  |[Cruelty]                         |1   |N/A |N/A |N/A |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|7th  |[Smite good] 3/day                |1   |0   |N/A |N/A |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|8th  |[Aura of Despair]                 |1   |1   |N/A |N/A |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|9th  |[Cruelty]                         |2   |1   |N/A |N/A |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|10th |[Smite good] 4/day                |2   |1   |0   |N/A |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|11th |[Aura of Vengeance]               |2   |1   |1   |N/A |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|12th |[Cruelty]                         |2   |2   |1   |N/A |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|13th |[Smite good] 5/day                |3   |2   |1   |0   |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|14th |[Aura of sin]                     |3   |2   |1   |1   |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|15th |[Cruelty]                         |3   |2   |2   |1   |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|16th |[Smite good] 6/day                |3   |3   |2   |1   |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|17th |[Aura of Depravity]               |4   |3   |2   |1   |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|18th |[Cruelty]                         |4   |3   |2   |2   |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|19th |[Smite good] 7/day                |4   |3   |3   |2   |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+
|20th |[Unholy Champion]                 |4   |4   |3   |3   |
+-----+----------------------------------+----+----+----+----+

##### Class Features

All of the following are class features of the antipaladin.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency**: Antipaladins are proficient
with all simple and martial weapons, with all types of armor
(heavy, medium, and light), and with shields (except tower
shields).

**Aura of Evil (Ex)**: The power of an antipaladin's aura of evil
(see the *[detect evil]*spell) is equal to his antipaladin
level. A paladin who uses smite evil on an antipaladin deals 2
points of damage per paladin level on his first successful
attack.

**Detect Good (Sp)**: At will, an antipaladin can use *[detect
good],*as the spell. An antipaladin can, as a move action,
concentrate on a single item or individual within 60 feet and
determine if it is good, learning the strength of its aura as if
having studied it for 3 rounds. While focusing on one individual
or object, the antipaladin does not detect good in any other
object or individual within range.

**Smite Good (Su)**: Once per day, an antipaladin can call out to
the dark powers to crush the forces of good. As a swift action,
the antipaladin chooses one target within sight to smite. If this
target is good, the antipaladin adds his Charisma bonus (if any)
on his attack rolls and adds his antipaladin level on all damage
rolls made against the target of his smite. If the target of
smite good is an outsider with the good subtype, a good-aligned
dragon, or a good creature with levels of cleric or paladin, the
bonus to damage on the first successful attack increases to 2
points of damage per level the antipaladin possesses.  Regardless
of the target, smite good attacks automatically bypass any DR the
creature might possess.

In addition, while smite good is in effect, the antipaladin gains
a deflection bonus equal to his Charisma modifier (if any) to his
AC against attacks made by the target of the smite. If the
antipaladin targets a creature that is not good, the smite is
wasted with no effect.

The smite good effect remains until the target of the smite is
dead or the next time the antipaladin rests and regains his uses
of this ability. At 4th level, and at every three levels
thereafter, the antipaladin may smite good one additional time
per day, as indicated on Table 2-13, to a maximum of seven times
per day at 19th level.

**Unholy Resilience (Su)**: At 2nd level, an antipaladin gains a
bonus equal to his Charisma bonus (if any) on all saving throws.

**Touch of Corruption (Su)**: Beginning at 2nd level, an
antipaladin surrounds his hand with a fiendish flame, causing
terrible wounds to open on those he touches. Each day he can use
this ability a number of times equal to 1/2 his antipaladin level
+ his Charisma modifier. As a touch attack, an antipaladin can
cause 1d6 points of damage for every two antipaladin levels he
possesses. Using this ability is a standard action that does not
provoke attacks of opportunity.

Alternatively, an antipaladin can use this power to heal undead
creatures, restoring 1d6 hit points for every two levels the
antipaladin possesses. This ability is modified by any feat,
spell, or effect that specifically works with the lay on hands
paladin class feature. For example, the [Extra Lay On Hands] feat
grants an antipaladin 2 additional uses of the touch of
corruption class feature.

**Aura of Cowardice (Su)**: At 3rd level, an antipaladin radiates
a palpably daunting aura that causes all enemies within 10 feet
to take a -4 penalty on saving throws against fear
effects. Creatures that are normally immune to fear lose that
immunity while within 10 feet of an antipaladin with this
ability. This ability functions only while the antipaladin
remains conscious, not if he is unconscious or dead.

**Plague Bringer (Ex)**: At 3rd level, the powers of darkness
make an antipaladin a beacon of corruption and disease. An
antipaladin does not take any damage or take any penalty from
diseases. He can still contract diseases and spread them to
others, but he is otherwise immune to their effects.

**Cruelty (Su)**: At 3rd level, and every three levels
thereafter, an antipaladin can select one cruelty. Each cruelty
adds an effect to the antipaladin's touch of corruption
ability. Whenever the antipaladin uses touch of corruption to
deal damage to one target, the target also receives the
additional effect from one of the cruelties possessed by the
antipaladin. This choice is made when the touch is used. The
target receives a Fortitude save to avoid this cruelty. If the
save is successful, the target takes the damage as normal, but
not the effects of the cruelty. The DC of this save is equal to
10 + 1/2 the antipaladin's level + the antipaladin's Charisma
modifier. At 3rd level, the antipaladin can select from the
following initial cruelties.

*• Fatigued*: The target is fatigued.

*• Shaken*: The target is shaken for 1 round per level of the
antipaladin.

*• Sickened*: The target is sickened for 1 round per level of the
antipaladin.

At 6th level, an antipaladin adds the following cruelties to the
list of those that can be selected.

*• Dazed*: The target is dazed for 1 round.

*• Diseased*: The target contracts a disease, as if the
antipaladin had cast *[contagion]*, using his antipaladin level
as his caster level.

*• Staggered*: The target is staggered for 1 round per two levels
of the antipaladin.

At 9th level, an antipaladin adds the following cruelties to the
list of those that can be selected.

*• Cursed*: The target is cursed, as if the antipaladin had cast
*[bestow curse]*, using his antipaladin level as his caster
*level.

*• Exhausted*: The target is exhausted. The antipaladin must have
the fatigue cruelty before selecting this cruelty.

*• Frightened*: The target is frightened for 1 round per two
levels of the antipaladin. The antipaladin must have the shaken
cruelty before selecting this cruelty.

*• Nauseated*: The target is nauseated for 1 round per three
levels of the antipaladin. The antipaladin must have the sickened
cruelty before selecting this cruelty.

*• Poisoned*: The target is poisoned, as if the antipaladin had
*cast [poison]*, using the antipaladin's level as the caster
*level.

At 12th level, an antipaladin adds the following cruelties to the
list of those that can be selected.

*• Blinded*: The target is blinded for 1 round per level of the
antipaladin.

*• Deafened*: The target is deafened for 1 round per level of the
antipaladin.

*• Paralyzed*: The target is paralyzed for 1 round.

*• Stunned*: The target is stunned for 1 round per four levels of
the antipaladin.

These abilities are not cumulative. For example, a 12th-level
antipaladin's touch of corruption ability deals 6d6 points of
damage and might also cause the target to become fatigued, dazed,
poisoned, or diseased. Once a cruelty is chosen, it can't be
changed.

**Channel Negative Energy (Su)**: When an antipaladin reaches 4th
level, he gains the supernatural ability to channel negative
energy like a cleric. Using this ability consumes two uses of his
touch of corruption ability. An antipaladin uses his level as his
effective cleric level when channeling negative energy. This is a
Charisma-based ability.

**Spells**: Beginning at 4th level, an antipaladin gains the
ability to cast a small number of divine spells which are drawn
from the antipaladin spell list presented in Chapter 5. An
antipaladin must choose and prepare his spells in advance. To
prepare or cast a spell, an antipaladin must have a Charisma
score equal to at least 10 + the spell level. The Difficulty
Class for a saving throw against an antipaladin's spell is 10 +
the spell level + the antipaladin's Charisma modifier.  Like
other spellcasters, an antipaladin can cast only a certain number
of spells of each spell level per day. His base daily spell
allotment is the same as that of a paladin and is given on Table
2-13. In addition, he receives bonus spells per day if he has a
high Charisma score (see Table 1-3 in the *Core Rulebook*). When
Table 2-13 indicates that the antipaladin gets 0 spells per day
of a given spell level, he gains only the bonus spells he would
be entitled to based on his Charisma score for that spell level.

An antipaladin must spend 1 hour each day in quiet prayer and
meditation to regain his daily allotment of spells. An
antipaladin may prepare and cast any spell on the antipaladin
spell list, provided that he can cast spells of that level, but
he must choose which spells to prepare during his daily
meditation.

Through 3rd level, an antipaladin has no caster level. At 4th
level and higher, his caster level is equal to his antipaladin
level -3.

**Fiendish Boon (Sp)**: Upon reaching 5th level, an antipaladin
receives a boon from his dark patrons. This boon can take one of
two forms. Once the form is chosen, it cannot be changed.

The first type of bond allows the antipaladin to enhance his
weapon as a standard action by calling upon the aid of a fiendish
spirit for 1 minute per antipaladin level. When called, the
spirit causes the weapon to shed unholy light as a torch. At 5th
level, this spirit grants the weapon a +1 enhancement bonus. For
every three levels beyond 5th, the weapon gains another +1
enhancement bonus, to a maximum of +6 at 20th level. These
bonuses can be added to the weapon, stacking with existing weapon
bonuses to a maximum of +5, or they can be used to add any of the
following weapon properties: *[Anarchic]*, *[Flaming], [Flaming
Burst], [Keen], [Speed], [Unholy], [Vicious], [Vorpal]*, and
*[Wounding]*. Adding these properties consumes an amount of bonus
equal to the property's cost (see Table 15-9 in the *Core
Rulebook*). These bonuses are added to any properties the weapon
already has, but duplicate abilities do not stack.  If the weapon
is not magical, at least a +1 enhancement bonus must be added
before any other properties can be added. The bonus and
properties granted by the spirit are determined when the spirit
is called and cannot be changed until the spirit is called
again. The fiendish spirit imparts no bonuses if the weapon is
held by anyone other than the antipaladin but resumes giving
bonuses if returned to the antipaladin.  These bonuses apply to
only one end of a double weapon. An antipaladin can use this
ability once per day at 5th level, and one additional time per
day for every four levels beyond 5th, to a total of four times
per day at 17th level.

If a weapon bonded with a fiendish spirit is destroyed, the
antipaladin loses the use of this ability for 30 days, or until
he gains a level, whichever comes first. During this 30-day
period, the antipaladin takes a -1 penalty on attack and weapon
damage rolls.

The second type of bond allows an antipaladin to gain the service
of a fiendish servant. This functions as *[Summon Monster III]*,
except the duration is permanent and the antipaladin can only
gain the service of a single creature and that creature must
either have the chaotic and evil subtypes or it must be a
fiendish animal. Once selected, the choice is set, but it may be
changed whenever the antipaladin gains a level. Upon reaching 7th
level, and every two levels thereafter, the level of the *summon
monster* spell increases by one, to a maximum of *[Summon Monster
IX]* at 17th level.

Once per day, as a full-round action, an antipaladin may
magically call his servant to his side. This ability is the
equivalent of a spell of a level equal to one-third the
antipaladin's level. The servant immediately appears adjacent to
the antipaladin. An antipaladin can use this ability once per day
at 5th level, and one additional time per day for every four
levels thereafter, for a total of four times per day at 17th
level.

At 11th level, the servant gains the advanced template (see the
*PF RPG Bestiary*). At 15th level, an antipaladin's
servant gains spell resistance equal to the antipaladin's level +
11.

Should the antipaladin's fiendish servant die or be banished, the
antipaladin may not summon another servant for 30 days or until
he gains an antipaladin level, whichever comes first. During this
30-day period, the antipaladin takes a -1 penalty on attack and
weapon damage rolls.

**Aura of Despair (Su)**: At 8th level, enemies within 10 feet of
an antipaladin take a -2 penalty on all saving throws. This
penalty does not stack with the penalty from aura of cowardice.

This ability functions only while the antipaladin is conscious,
not if he is unconscious or dead.

**Aura of Vengeance (Su)**: At 11th level, an antipaladin can
expend two uses of his smite good ability to grant the ability to
smite good to all allies within 10 feet, using his
bonuses. Allies must use this smite good ability by the start of
the antipaladin's next turn and the bonuses last for 1
minute. Using this ability is a free action. Good creatures gain
no benefit from this ability.

**Aura of Sin (Su)**: At 14th level, an antipaladin's weapons are
treated as evil-aligned for the purposes of overcoming damage
reduction.  Any attack made against an enemy within 10 feet of
him is treated as evil-aligned for the purposes of overcoming
damage reduction. This ability functions only while the
antipaladin is conscious, not if he is unconscious or dead.

**Aura of Depravity (Su)**: At 17th level, an antipaladin gains
DR 5/good. Each enemy within 10 feet takes a -4 penalty on saving
throws against compulsion effects. This ability functions only
while the antipaladin is conscious, not if he is unconscious or
dead.

**Unholy Champion (Su)**: At 20th level, an antipaladin becomes a
conduit for the might of the dark powers. His DR increases to
10/good.  Whenever he uses smite good and successfully strikes an
good outsider, the outsider is also subject to a
*[Banishment],*using his antipaladin level as the caster level
(his weapon and unholy symbol automatically count as objects that
the subject hates). After the *[Banishment]*effect and the damage
from the attack is resolved, the smite immediately ends. In
addition, whenever he channels negative energy or uses touch of
corruption to damage a creature, he deals the maximum possible
amount.

**Code of Conduct**: An antipaladin must be of chaotic evil
alignment and loses all class features except proficiencies if he
willingly and altruistically commits good acts. This does not
mean that an antipaladin cannot take actions someone else might
qualify as good, only that such actions must always be in service
of his own dark ends. An antipaladin's code requires that he
place his own interests and desires above all else, as well as
impose tyranny, take advantage whenever possible, and punish the
good and just, provided such actions don't interfere with his
goals.

**Associates**: While he may adventure with evil or neutral
allies, an antipaladin avoids working with good characters or
with anyone who consistently attempts to do good deeds. Under
exceptional circumstances, an antipaladin can ally with good
associates, but only to defeat them from within and bring ruin to
their ranks. An antipaladin does not need an *[Atonement] *spell
during such an unusual alliance as long as his nefarious goals
are met in the end—evil cares only about results. An antipaladin
may accept only henchmen, followers, or cohorts who are chaotic
evil.

### Ex-Antipaladins

A antipaladin who ceases to be chaotic evil, who willfully
commits an good act, or who violates the code of conduct loses
all antipaladin spells and class features (including the fiendish
boon, but not weapon, armor, and shield proficiencies). He may
not progress any further in levels as an antipaladin. He regains
his abilities and advancement potential if he atones for his
violations (see the *[Atonement]* spell), as appropriate.


## Ranger

Where the average druid eschews settlements entirely, seeking
solace in the wilds, rangers are the border riders, living on
civilization's tattered edge. They are the scouts and the bounty
hunters, the trackers and woodsmen, and in their chosen
environments they are unmatchable.  Self-sufficient and keenly
aware of their surroundings, rangers surive through strength,
wit, and adaptability, stalking their prey and melting into the
woods or wastes without a trace. It is this very adapabtibility
and staunch, pioneering sense of independence that leads rangers
out of more formal society or schooling and into a number of
different specializations and combat styles, from two-handed
fighting and breathtaking feats of archery to mastery of
particular terrains or communication with the beasts around them.

Presented below are a number of alternate class features and
archetypes to help customize your ranger, whether he's a bold
master of beasts or a shifty forest scout adept at tracking the
enemy and picking off the unwary.

### New Combat Styles

At 2nd level, a ranger must select one of the two core [Combat
Styles] or one of the following new combat styles: crossbow,
mounted combat, natural weapon, two-handed weapon, or weapon and
shield style. The ranger can choose feats from his selected
combat style even if he does not have the normal prerequisites.

**Crossbow**: If the ranger selects crossbow style, he can choose
from the following list whenever he gains a combat style feat:
[Deadly Aim], [Focused Shot]), [Precise Shot], and [Rapid
Reload]. At 6th level, he adds [Crossbow Mastery]) and [Improved
Precise Shot] to the list. At 10th level, he adds[Pinpoint
Targeting] and [Shot on the Run] to the list.

**[Mounted Combat]**: If the ranger selects mounted combat, he
can choose from the following list whenever he gains a combat
style feat: [Mounted Combat], [Mounted Archery], [Ride-By
Attack], and [Trick Riding]). At 6th level, he adds [Mounted
Shield]) and [Spirited Charge] to the list. At 10th level, he
adds [Mounted Skirmisher]) and [Unseat] to the list.

**Natural Weapon**: If the ranger selects natural weapon style,
he can choose from the following list whenever he gains a combat
style feat: [Aspect of the Beast], [Improved Natural Weapon],
[Rending Claws]), and [Weapon Focus]. At 6th level, he adds
Eldritch Fangs and [Vital Strike] to the list. At 10th level, he
adds [Multiattack and][Improved Vital Strike] to the list.

**Two-Handed Weapon**: If the ranger selects two-handed weapon
style, he can choose from the following list whenever he gains a
combat style feat: [Cleave], [Power Attack], [Pushing Assault]),
and [Shield of Swings]). At 6th level, he adds [Furious Focus])
and [Great Cleave] to the list. At 10th level, he adds [Dreadful
Carnage]) and [Improved Sunder] to the list.

**Weapon and Shield**: If the ranger selects weapon and shield
style, he can choose from the following list whenever he gains a
combat style feat: [Improved Shield Bash], [Shield Focus],
[Shield Slam], and [Two-Weapon Fighting]. At 6th level, he adds
[Saving Shield]) and [Shield Master] to the list. At 10th level,
he adds [Bashing Finish]) and [Greater Shield Focus] to the list.

### Beast Master

Some rangers, particularly those in primitive lands or who were
raised by animals, have unusually strong bonds with
animals. Unique among rangers, they can bond with multiple
animals of any kind, creating a menagerie of wild yet loyal
creatures, like a strange family. A beast master has the
following class features.

**Class Skills**: A beast master's class skills are [Acrobatics]
(Dex), [Climb] (Str), [Craft] (Int), [Escape Artist] (Dex),
[Handle Animal] (Cha), [Heal] (Wis), [Intimidate] (Cha),
[Knowledge] (nature) (Int), [Perception] (Wis), [Ride] (Dex),
[Stealth] (Dex), [Survival] (Wis), and [Swim] (Wis). These
replace the standard ranger class skills.

**Animal Companion (Ex)**: A beast master forms a close bond with
an animal companion. This ability functions like the druid animal
companion ability except that the ranger's effective druid level
is equal to his ranger level - 3. The ranger gains a +2 bonus on
wild empathy and [Handle Animal] checks made regarding his animal
companion. Unlike a normal ranger, a beast master's choice of
animal companion is not limited to a subset of all possibile
animal companion choices—he may choose freely among all animal
companion choices, just as a druid can.

The beast master may have more than one animal companion, but he
must divide up his effective druid level between his companions
to determine the abilities of each companion. For example, a
beast master with an effective druid level of 4 can have one
4th-level companion, two 2nd-level companions, or one 1st-level
and one 3rd-level companion. Each time a beast master's effective
druid level increases, he must decide how to allocate the
increase among his animal companions (including the option of
adding a new 1st-level companion). Once an effective druid level
is allocated to a particular companion, it cannot be
redistributed while that companion is in the ranger's service (he
must release a companion or wait until a companion dies to
allocate its levels to another companion). The share spells
animal companion ability does not give the ranger the ability to
cast a single spell so that it affects all of his animal
companions. This ability replaces hunter's bond.

**Improved Empathic Link (Su)**: The beast master gains an
empathic link with all of his animal companions. This functions
like an empathic link with a familiar, except the ranger can also
see through a companion's eyes as a swift action, maintaining
this connection as long as he likes (as long as the companion is
within 1 mile) and ending it as a free action. The ranger can
only see through the eyes of one companion at a time, and is
blinded while maintaining this connection. This replaces the
6th-level combat style feat.

**Strong Bond (Ex)**: At 12th level, the ranger strengthens his
bond with his animal companions. The ranger's effective druid
level for his animal companions is now equal to his ranger level;
he may immediately allocate these additional levels to his
companions as he sees fit. This ability replaces camouflage.

### Guide

Many rangers are loners, but some choose to use their familiarity
with the land to guide others safely through the wilderness. The
guide forgoes a favored enemy to focus on the task or foe at
hand, and can pass his knowledge and luck on to his charges. A
guide has the following class features.

**Ranger's Focus (Ex)**: At 1st level, once per day, the guide
can focus on a single enemy within line of sight as a swift
action. That creature remains the ranger's focus until it is
reduced to 0 or fewer hit points or surrenders, or until the
ranger designates a new focus, whichever occurs first. The ranger
gains a +2 bonus on attack and damage rolls against the target of
his focus. At 5th level, and every five levels thereafter, this
bonus increases by +2.

At 4th level, and every 3 levels thereafter, the ranger can use
this ability one additional time per day. This ability replaces
favored enemy.

**Terrain Bond (Ex)**: At 4th level, the guide forms a bond with
the land itself, enabling him to direct others in such
terrain. When in his favored terrain, the ranger grants all
allies within line of sight and that can hear him a +2 bonus on
initiative checks and [Perception], [Stealth], and [Survival]
skill checks. Also, as long as they travel with him, the ranger's
allies leave no trail and can't be tracked. The ranger can choose
for the group to leave a trail, or even specific members of the
group to leave a trail if he so desires.  This ability replaces
hunter's bond.

**Ranger's Luck (Ex)**: Upon reaching 9th level, once per day the
guide can either reroll one of his attack rolls or force an enemy
who just hit him with an attack to reroll the attack roll. The
ranger must take the result of the second roll even if it is
worse. A ranger can use this ability once per day at 9th level,
plus one additional time per day at 14th and 19th levels. This
ability replaces evasion.

**Inspired Moment (Ex)**: At 11th level, the guide can have an
inspired moment once per day as a free action. The ranger gains
the following benefits until the end of his next turn. His speed
increases by 10 feet.  He can take an extra move or swift action
on his turn. He gains a +4 bonus to AC and on attack rolls, skill
checks, or ability checks.  Finally, he automatically confirms
any critical threat he scores. He can use this ability one
additional time per day at 19th level. This ability replaces
quarry and improved quarry.

**Improved Ranger's Luck (Ex)**: Upon reaching 16th level, the
ranger's luck increases. He gains a +4 bonus on his rerolls made
with the ranger's luck ability, or if he forces an enemy to
reroll an attack, that enemy takes a -4 penalty on the roll. This
bonus or penalty is also applied on any roll to confirm critical
hits. This ability replaces improved evasion.

### Horse Lord

Rangers of the plains use horses or other riding beasts to hunt
their lands, forging a near-mystical relationship with their
mounts. Horse lords are unparalleled mounted combatants, the envy
of even the most dedicated cavalier. Though called “horse lords”
as a generic term, these rangers are not restricted to horses for
their animal companions—any creature the ranger can ride is
included in these abilities. A horse lord has the following class
features.

**Combat Style Feat (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a horse lord must
choose the mounted combat style.

**Mounted Bond (Ex)**: At 4th level, the horse lord forms a bond
with an animal he can use as a mount, which becomes his animal
companion. A Medium ranger can select a camel or a horse. A small
ranger can select a pony or wolf, but can also select a boar or
dog if he is at least 7th level. This ability functions like the
druid animal companion ability except that the ranger's effective
druid level is equal to his ranger level - 3. The ranger gains a
+2 bonus on [Handle Animal] and [Ride] checks with his animal
companion mount. This ability replaces hunter's bond.

**Strong Bond (Ex)**: At 12th level, the horse lord strengthens
his bond with his mount. The ranger's effective druid level for
his mount is now equal to his ranger level. This ability replaces
camouflage.

**Spiritual Bond (Su)**: At 17th level, the horse lord can grant
his animal companion temporary hit points equal to his ranger
level once per day. While these temporary hit points last, when
his mount is within 30 feet of the him, he can choose to share
the damage taken by his mount as if using *[shield other]*.  This
ability replaces hide in plain sight.

### Infiltrator

Some rangers study their favored enemies and learn their ways,
applying this knowledge to their own abilities and using their
foes' strengths against them. Infiltrators are willing to walk a
mile in an enemy's shoes so as to learn eveything there is to
know about their foes in order to more effectively hunt and kill
them.

**Adaptation (Ex)**: At 3rd level, an infiltrator learns how to
copy the unusual abilities of his prey. He chooses one type of
creature he has selected as a favored enemy, such as
“aberrations.” The ranger selects one ability or feat from the
adaptation list for that type (see below).  A ranger can use
adaptations for 10 minutes per day per ranger level he
possesses. This duration does not need to be consecutive, but it
must be used in 10-minute increments. If the adaptation requires
the ranger to make a more specific choice (such as what skill to
use with [Skill Focus]), this choice is permanent and cannot be
changed.

At 8th, 13th, and 15th-level, the ranger chooses another one of
his favored enemy types and selects one adaptation from that
type's list, as well as an additional adaptation from any one
list of a creature type he's selected (including the one just
chosen, if so desired). The infiltrator can only use one
adaptation at a time. This class ability replaces favored
terrain.

*Aberration*: amphibious, darkvision 60 ft., [Iron Will], natural
 armor +2.

*Animal*: climb 15 ft., darkvision 60 ft., [Great Fortitude],
[Lightning Reflexes], low-light vision, natural armor (+2), swim
15 ft.

*Construct*: darkvision 60 ft., [Great Fortitude], [Lightning
 Reflexes], low-light vision.

*Dragon*: darkvision 60 ft., [Great Fortitude], [Iron Will],
[Lightning Reflexes], low-light vision, [Lunge].

*Fey*: [Iron Will], [Lightning Reflexes], low-light vision.

*Humanoid (aquatic)*: low-light vision, natural armor +2,
darkvision, swim 15 ft.

*Humanoid (dwarf)*: darkvision 60 ft., defensive training, greed,
hatred, hardy, slow and steady, stability, stonecunning, weapon
familiarity.

*Humanoid (elf)*: elf blood, low-light vision, elven immunities,
elven magic, keen senses, [Skill Focus] (choose one skill),
weapon familiarity.

*Humanoid (giant)*: low-light vision, [Lunge], natural armor +2,
resist energy 10 (choose cold, electricity, or fire), [Throw
Anything].

*Humanoid (gnoll)*: darkvision 60 ft., [Exotic Weapon
Proficiency] (dire flail), natural armor +2.

*Humanoid (gnome)*: defensive training, gnome magic, hatred,
illusion resistance, keen senses, low-light vision, obsessive,
weapon familiarity.

*Humanoid (goblinoid)*: darkvision 60 ft., goblin fast, [Skill
Focus] ([Stealth]), natural armor (+2).

*Humanoid (halfling)*: fearless, halfling luck, keen senses,
sure-footed, weapon familiarity.

*Humanoid (human)*: [Great Fortitude], [Iron Will], [Lightning
 Reflexes], [Skill Focus] (choose one skill).

*Humanoid (orc)*: darkvision 60 ft., ferocity, intimidating, orc
blood, weapon familiarity.

*Humanoid (reptilian)*: darkvision 60 ft., kobold fast (as goblin
fast), lizardfolk hold breath, natural armor +2, [Skill Focus]
(choose [Acrobatics], [Perception], or [Stealth]).

*Magical Beast*: darkvision 60 ft., [Great Fortitude], low-light
vision, natural armor +2.

*Monstrous Humanoid*: darkvision 60 ft., [Lightning Reflexes],
low-light vision, natural armor +2.

*Ooze*: acid resistance 10, [Great Fortitude], [Iron Will],
[Skill Focus] (choose [Climb], [Escape Artist], or [Perception]).

*Outsider*: darkvision 60 ft., energy resistance 5 (choose one
type of energy from acid, cold, electricity, or fire), [Great
Fortitude], [Iron Will], [Lightning Reflexes].

*Plant*: low-light vision, [Great Fortitude], [Iron Will].

*Undead*: darkvision 60 ft., [Great Fortitude], [Iron Will],
natural armor (+2). [Skill Focus] ([Stealth]).

*Vermin*: climb 15 ft., darkvision 60 ft., [Great Fortitude],
 [Iron Will], swim 15 ft.

### Shapeshifter

Most rangers venture into the wilderness, but there are some who
let the wilderness seep into them. Whether by curse, disease,
ancient rite, a slight lycanthropic influence in the blood, or
the corrupting influence of chaos, these rangers embrace the wild
to transform themselves into something untamed and
feral. Shapeshifters are often held in awe, but are even more
often feared. A shapeshifter has the following class features.

**Combat Style Feat (Ex)**: At 2nd level, a shapeshifter ranger
must choose the natural weapon combat style.

**Shifter's Blessing (Su)**: At 3rd level, the shapeshifter can
take on the aspects of a wild creature once per day as a swift
action. He can remain in this form for a number of rounds equal
to his ranger level + his Wisdom modifier. While in one of his
shifter's blessing forms, the ranger gains the shapeshifter
subtype.

The shapeshifter must choose one of the following forms. Once
this choice is made, it cannot be changed.

*Form of the Bear*: The ranger's muscles enlarge and tighten, and
his facial features become more ursine. While in this form, the
ranger gains a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength, but his base
speed becomes 20 feet.

*Form of the Cat*: The ranger's muscles become lean and defined,
and his gait more deliberate and graceful. While in this form,
the ranger increases his base speed by 10 feet, and he gains a +4
bonus on [Acrobatics] and [Climb] checks.

*Form of the Dragon*: The ranger's skin becomes rough and
scaly. While in this form, the ranger gains a +2 natural armor
bonus to AC.

*Form of the Eagle*: The ranger's skin stretches, his nose
becomes hooked, and his eyes enlarge. While in this form, the
ranger gains a +10 bonus on [Perception] checks.

*Form of the Jackal*: The ranger becomes thin and hyperactive,
his movements taking on a nervous spryness. While in this form,
the ranger can spend a move action to move up to 1/2 his speed
without provoking attacks of opportunity.

*Form of the Otter*: The ranger's hands and feet grow webs, and
his body grows an oily fur that is water resistant. While in this
form, the ranger gains a swim speed of 30 feet and a +8 bonus on
[Swim] checks.

At 8th level and again every five levels thereafter, the ranger
may select an additional form for his shifter's blessing and may
use this ability one additional time per day. This is not a
polymorph ability; a ranger with shifter's blessing in one of his
shifted forms can be affected by a polymorph ability and retain
his bonus and traits gained by the class feature. This ability
replaces favored terrain.

**Dual Form Shifter (Ex)**: At 12th level, when the shapeshifter
takes on a shifter's blessing form, he can take on a hybrid of
two of his forms. He gains the bonuses for both forms. This
ability replaces camouflage.

**Master Shifter (Su)**: At 20th level, the ranger's shifter's
blessing forms improve, and he can take on true forms of
beasts. The ranger can use dual form shifter with this ability,
although he cannot use more than one polymorph effect at any one
time. This ability replaces master hunter. The ranger's forms
from shifter's blessing improve to the following:

*Form of the Bear*: The ranger's muscles enlarge and tighten, and
his facial features become more ursine. While in this form, the
ranger gains a +8 enhancement bonus to Strength and he does not
suffer any reduction of speed. Alternatively, the ranger can
polymorph into the form of a bear as if the caster of *[Beast
Shape IV]*.

*Form of the Cat*: The ranger's muscles become lean and defined,
and his gait more deliberate and graceful. While in this form,
the ranger increases his base speed by 20 feet and he gains a +10
bonus on [Acrobatics] and [Climb] checks. Alternatively, the
ranger can polymorph into the form of a cat of any size as if the
caster of *[Beast Shape IV]*.

*Form of the Dragon*: The ranger's skin becomes rough and
scaly. While in this form, the ranger gains a +4 natural armor
bonus to AC and a fly speed of 30 feet with average
maneuverability. Alternately, the ranger can polymorph into the
form of a dragon as if the caster of *[Form of the Dragon I]*.

*Form of the Eagle*: The ranger's skin stretches, his nose
becomes hooked, and his eyes enlarge. While in this form, the
ranger gains a +10 bonus on [Perception] checks and a fly speed
of 40 feet with good maneuverability. Alternatively, the ranger
can polymorph into the form of an eagle or similar raptor as if
the caster of *[Beast Shape IV]*.

*Form of the Jackal*: The ranger becomes thin and hyperactive,
his movements taking on a nervous spryness. While in this form,
the ranger does not provoke attacks of opportunity due to
movement. Alternatively, the ranger can polymorph into the form
of a jackal or other canine creature as if the caster of *[Beast
Shape IV]*.

*Form of the Otter*: The ranger's hands and feet grow webs, and
his body grows an oily fur that is water resistant. While in this
form, the ranger gains a swim speed of 60 feet and a +5 bonus on
[Swim] checks. Alternatively, the ranger can polymorph into the
form of an otter or similar river mammal as if the caster of
*[Beast Shape IV]*.

### Skirmisher

Many rangers rely on spells, but there are some who eschew aid
from divine powers for their own reasons. Skirmishers rely on
their wits, their wisdom, and sometimes even instinct to aid in
their quests. A skirmisher has the following class features.

**Hunter's Tricks**: At 5th level, a skirmisher ranger learns the
use of hunter's tricks, which typically grant a boon or bonus to
the ranger or a nearby ally. At 5th level, the ranger learns one
trick, selected from the list below. At 7th level, and every two
levels thereafter, he learns another trick. A ranger can use
these tricks a total number of times per day equal to 1/2 his
ranger level + his Wisdom modifier. Tricks are usually swift
actions, but sometimes move or free actions that modify a
standard action, usually an attack action. Once a trick is
chosen, it can't be retrained. A ranger cannot select an
individual trick more than once. This ability replaces the
ranger's spells class feature.  Skirmishers do not gain any
spells or spellcasting ability, do not have a caster level, and
cannot use spell trigger and spell completion magic items.

The following is a list of hunter tricks and their effects.

*Aiding Attack (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as a free
action when he hits a creature with an attack. The next ally who
makes an attack against the target creature before the start of
the ranger's next turn gains a +2 circumstance bonus on that
attack roll.

*Bolster Companion (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as an
immediate action when his animal companion is hit with an attack
or a combat maneuver. The companion's AC and combat maneuver
defense increase by +4 for the purposes of that attack. If the
attack still hits, the animal companion only takes half damage
(if any). The animal companion must be able to see and hear the
ranger to benefit from this trick.

*Catfall (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as an immediate
action when he falls 20 or more feet, ignoring the first 20 feet
of the fall when calculating the falling damage. If the ranger
takes no damage from the fall, he does not fall prone.

*Chameleon Step (Ex)*: The ranger can move up to twice his speed
as a move action. The ranger does not take any penalty on
[Stealth] checks for movement during this move. This move
provokes attacks of opportunity as normal.

*Cunning Pantomime (Ex)*: As a standard action, the ranger can
communicate with a single creature as if using the *[tongues]*
spell for 10 minutes.  Because the communication is slow and
lacks subtlety, the ranger suffers a -4 penalty on all [Bluff]
and [Diplomacy] checks relating to the creature he is
communicating with when using this trick.

*Defensive Bow Stance (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as a
swift action. Until the start of his next turn, his ranged
attacks do not provoke attacks of opportunity.

*Deft Stand (Ex)*: The ranger can spend a move action to stand up
without provoking attacks of opportunity.

*Distracting Attack (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as a
free action before he makes an attack. If the attack hits, the
target takes a -2 penalty on all attack rolls for 1 round.

*Hateful Attack (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as a free
action when he makes an attack against one of his favored
enemies. The ranger doubles the threat range of his weapon for
this attack. This does not stack with other abilities that
increase a weapon's threat range.

*Heel (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as an immediate action
when his animal companion moves. When the companion moves, the
square it starts out in is not considered threatened by any
opponent it can see, and therefore visible enemies do not get
attacks of opportunity against it when it moves from that
square. The companion must end this movement in a square adjacent
to the ranger. The animal companion must be able to see and hear
the ranger to take this movement.

*Hobbling Attack (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as a free
action when he hits with an attack. The target of the attack's
land speed is reduced by 1/2 for 1d4 rounds.

*Quick [Climb] (Ex)*: The ranger can climb at his full speed as a
move action without penalty.

*Quick Healing (Ex)*: As a swift action, the ranger can make a
[Heal] check to administer first aid on an adjacent dying
character. Alternatively, the ranger can administer a potion to
an unconscious character as a move action.

*Quick [Swim] (Ex)*: The ranger can swim at his full speed as a
move action without penalty.

*Ranger's Counsel (Ex)*: As a swift action, the ranger can grant
all allies within 30 feet that are within line of sight and can
hear him a +2 bonus on skill checks with a single skill of his
choice. The ranger must have at least one rank in the chosen
skill. This bonus lasts for 1 round.

*Rattling Strike (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as a free
action before he makes a melee attack. If the attack hits, the
target is shaken for 1d4 rounds.

*[Second Chance]) Strike (Ex)*: When he misses with a melee
attack, the ranger may reroll his attack at a -5 penalty. Using
this ability is an immediate action.

*Sic 'Em (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as a swift
action. His animal companion makes one melee attack against an
adjacent creature.  The animal companion must be able to see and
hear the ranger to make this attack.

*Skill Sage (Ex)*: As a free action, the ranger can roll twice on
any one skill check and take the better result. He must have at
least 1 rank in that skill to use this ability.

*Stag's Leap (Ex)*: As a free action, the ranger can attempt a
running jump without moving 10 feet before the jump.

*Surprise Shift (Ex)*: The ranger can move 5 feet as a swift
action.  This movement does not provoke attacks of opportunity
and does not count as a 5-foot step.

*Tangling Attack (Ex)*: The ranger can use this attack as a free
action when he makes an attack. If the attack hits, the target is
entangled for 1 round.

*Trick Shot (Ex)*: As a standard action, the ranger can make a
ranged attack that ignores concealment (but not total
concealment), soft cover, and partial cover.

*Uncanny Senses (Ex)*: As an immediate action, the ranger gains a
+10 insight bonus on [Perception] checks for 1 round.

*Upending Strike (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as a free
action just before he makes a melee attack. If the attack hits,
he may make a free trip combat maneuver against the target.

*Vengeance Strike (Ex)*: The ranger can use this trick as an
immediate action when an enemy adjacent to him hits an ally with
a melee or ranged attack. The ranger can make a single melee
attack at his highest base attack bonus against the creature who
attacked his ally.

### Spirit Ranger

Some rangers nurture a connection with the spirits that reside in
all things. By communing with these spirits, the spirit ranger
can gain glimpses of things to come. A spirit ranger has the
following class features.

**Spirit Bond (Ex)**: At 4th level, instead of forming a bond
with his hunting companions or an animal companion, the spirit
ranger forms a bond with the spirits of nature themselves. Each
day, as long as he is within one of his favored terrains, the
ranger can cast *[Augury]* as a spell-like ability with a caster
level equal to his ranger level. In addition, he can call upon
these spirits to cast any one ranger spell that he is capable of
casting, without having to prepare the spell. At 8th level, and
every four levels thereafter, he can cast an additional spell in
this way.  This replaces hunter's bond.

**Wisdom of the Spirits (Sp)**: At 12th level, the spirit ranger
can use his *[Augury]* spell-like ability even when he is not in
one of his favored terrains. If he is within one of his favored
terrains, the ranger can cast *[Divination]* instead. Like
*[Augury]*, the caster level of the *[Divination]* is equal to
the ranger's level. This ability replaces camouflage.

### Urban Ranger

For the urban ranger, the streets and sewers of the city are just
as dangerous as the barren wastelands or the deep forests. An
urban ranger has the following class features.

**Urban Ranger**: At 1st level, an urban ranger adds [Disable
Device] and [Knowledge] (local) to his list of class skills and
removes [Handle Animal] and [Knowledge] (nature) from his list of
class skills.

**Favored Community (Ex)**: At 3rd level, the urban ranger forms
a bond with a community. While inside the limits of this
community, he gains a +2 bonus on initiative checks and
[Knowledge] (local), [Perception], [Stealth], and [Survival]
skill checks. An urban ranger traveling through his favored
community leaves no trail and cannot be tracked (although he may
leave a trail if he so desires).

At 8th level, and every five levels thereafter, an urban ranger
may select an additional favored community. In addition, at each
such interval, the skill bonus and initiative bonus in any one
favored community (including the one just selected, if so
desired) increases by +2.

For the purposes of this ability, a community is any settlement
consisting of 100 or more individuals. The community may be
larger than this minimum. Outlying farms, fields, and houses are
not considered part of a community. This ability replaces favored
terrain.

**Trapfinding (Ex)**: At 3rd level, an urban ranger can find and
disable traps, as the rogue class feature of the same name. This
ability replaces endurance.

**Push Through (Ex)**: At 7th level, an urban ranger is never
slowed by difficult terrain in his favored communities. In
addition, he can move through the space occupied by local
citizens as if they were allies.  This does not apply to
creatures intent on harming the ranger. Areas that are enchanted
or magically manipulated to impede motion, however, still affect
him. This replaces woodland stride.

**Blend In (Ex)**: An urban ranger of 12th level or higher can
use his [Stealth] bonus in place of a [Disguise] skill check in
any of his favored communities. This disguise does not take an
action to don.  He must make a check whenever someone attempts to
pick him out from the local citizens. If his check is successful,
he blends into the crowd.  While not invisible, enemies do not
notice his presence and take no actions against him unless they
are taking actions against the local citizens in general. This
replaces camouflage.

**Invisibility Trick (Sp)**: At 17th level, the urban ranger can
*cast [Greater Invisibility]* on himself as a wizard of his
*ranger level as a swift action. He can use this spell-like
*ability a number of times per day equal to his Wisdom modifier
*(minimum 1). This ability replaces hide in plain sight.



## Rogue

By their nature, rogues are varied and versatile. There are
rogues who haunt the city, those who stalk the forest, and those
who serve as agents of law. Wherever there is space for someone
to make her mark with agility and wit, the rogue is there, using
her wide range of skills and abilities to make a place for
herself, whether openly or through cunning and subterfuge. And
where a rogue's natural cunning and quick thinking aren't enough
to win the day, well—there's always the option of a knife in the
back.

The following rogue themes represent some of the most popular and
effective roguish archetypes. Each archetype comes with one or
more class features that must be taken. In addition, each
archetype includes a number of new rogue talent suggestions that,
while not mandatory, help to flesh out the character. Rogue
talents and advanced rogue talents marked with an asterisk (\*)
in the archetype sections can be found in the *PF RPG
Core Rulebook*.

**Rogue Talents**: The following new rogue talents can be taken
by any rogue who meets the prerequisites. Note that rogue talents
marked with a double asterisk (\*\*) in this list add effects to
a rogue's sneak attack. Only one of these talents can be applied
to an individual attack, and the decision must be made before the
attack roll is made.

*Assault Leader (Ex)*: Once per day, when the rogue misses with
an attack on a flanked opponent, she can designate a single ally
who is also flanking the target that her attack missed. That ally
can make a single melee attack against the opponent as an
immediate action.

*Befuddling Strike\*\* (Ex)*: When the rogue deals sneak attack
damage against an opponent, that opponent takes a -2 penalty on
attack rolls against the rogue for 1d4 rounds.

*Camouflage (Ex)*: Once per day, a rogue with this talent can
craft simple but effective camouflage from the surrounding
foliage. The rogue needs 1 minute to prepare the camouflage, but
once she does, it is good for the rest of the day or until the
rogue fails a saving throw against an area effect spell that
deals fire, cold, or acid damage, whichever comes first. The
rogue gains a +4 bonus on [Stealth] checks while within terrain
that matches the foliage used to make the camouflage. This
ability cannot be used in areas without natural foliage.

*Canny Observer (Ex)*: When a rogue with this talent makes a
[Perception] check to hear the details of a conversation or to
find concealed or secret objects (including doors and traps), she
gains a +4 bonus.

*Charmer (Ex)*: Once per day, the rogue can roll two dice while
making a [Diplomacy] check, and take the better result. She must
choose to use this talent before making the [Diplomacy] check. A
rogue can use this ability one additional time per day for every
5 rogue levels she possesses.

*Coax Information (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can use [Bluff]
or [Diplomacy] in place of [Intimidate] to force an opponent to
act friendly toward her.

*Combat Swipe*: A rogue who selects this talent gains [Improved
 Steal]) as a bonus feat.

*Cunning Trigger (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can use a swift
action to set off any trap within 30 feet that she constructed.

*Distracting Attack\*\* (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can make
sneak attacks with subtle flourishes that disorient and distract
her enemy.  When she hits a creature with a melee attack that
deals sneak attack damage, she can forgo the additional damage to
cause the creature to become flat-footed against one target of
her choosing until the beginning of her next turn. The rogue
cannot designate herself as the creature gaining the benefit of
this talent. Creatures with uncanny dodge are immune to
distracting attack.

*Expert Leaper (Ex)*: When making jump checks, the rogue is
always considered to have a running start. Also, when the rogue
deliberately falls, a DC 15 [Acrobatics] check allows her to
ignore the first 20 feet fallen, instead of the first 10 feet.

*Fast Fingers (Ex)*: Once per day, a rogue with this talent can
roll two dice while making a [Sleight of Hand] check and take the
better result. She must choose to use this talent before making
the [Sleight of Hand] check. A rogue can use this ability one
additional time per day for every 5 rogue levels she possesses.

*Fast Getaway (Ex)*: After successfully making a sneak attack or
[Sleight of Hand] check, a rogue with this talent can spend a
move action to take the withdraw action. She can move no more
than her speed during this movement.

*Fast Picks (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can use the [Disable
Device] skill to attempt to open a lock as a standard action
instead of a full-round action.

*Follow Clues (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can use
[Perception] to follow tracks as per the [Survival] skill.

*Guileful Polyglot (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent who has at
least one rank in [Linguistics] gains four additional
languages. A rogue with this talent who does not have any ranks
in [Linguistics] gains two additional languages. If the rogue
later gains ranks in [Linguistics], she gains two additional
languages, to a total of four additional languages above those
granted by the [Linguistics] skill itself.

*Hard to Fool (Ex)*: Once per day, a rogue with this talent can
roll two dice while making a [Sense Motive] check, and take the
better result. She must choose to use this talent before making
the [Sense Motive] check. A rogue can use this ability one
additional time per day for every 5 rogue levels she possesses.

*Honeyed Words (Ex)*: Once per day, the rogue can roll two dice
while making a [Bluff] check, and take the better result. She
must choose to use this talent before making the Bluff check. A
rogue can use this ability one additional time per day for every
five rogue levels she possesses.

*Lasting Poison (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can apply poison
to a weapon in such a way that it is effective for two successful
attacks instead of one. The poison has a reduced effect, however,
and saves made against the poison receive a +2 circumstance
bonus. Applying poison in this way requires a full-round action,
or a standard action if the rogue has the swift poison talent.

*Nimble Climber (Ex)*: When a rogue with this talent fails a
[Climb] check by 5 or more, she can immediately make another
[Climb] check at the surface's base DC +10. If successful, she
stops her fall by clinging onto the surface. The rogue does not
take falling damage when she stops her fall in this manner.

*Offensive Defense\*\* (Ex)*: When a rogue with this talent hits
a creature with a melee attack that deals sneak attack damage,
the rogue gains a +1 dodge bonus to AC for each sneak attack die
rolled for 1 round.

*Peerless Maneuver (Ex)*: Once per day, a rogue with this talent
can roll two dice while making an [Acrobatics] check, and take
the better result. She must choose to use this talent before
making the [Acrobatics] check. A rogue can use this ability one
additional time per day for every 5 rogue levels she possesses.

*Positioning Attack (Ex)*: Once per day, when a rogue with this
talent hits a creature with a melee attack, she can move up to 30
feet without provoking attacks of opportunity. The movement must
end in a space adjacent to the creature hit with the melee
attack.

*Powerful Sneak\*\* (Ex)*: Whenever a rogue with this talent
takes a full attack action, she can elect to take a -2 penalty on
all attack rolls until the start of her next turn. If an attack
during this time is a sneak attack, she treats all 1s on the
sneak attack damage dice as 2s.

*Quick Disguise (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can use the items
at hand and seemingly innocuous material hidden on her person to
create startlingly effective disguises, reducing the amount of
time it takes to create a disguise using the [Disguise] skill.

The time needed for the rogue to alter her appearance in this
manner is based on the complexity of the disguise, as noted on
the following table. The times are cumulative, so if a female
rogue wants to disguise herself as a male of a different race,
that takes 2 minutes.

  Disguise                                  Time
  ----------------------------------------- -------------------
  Minor details only                        1 full-round action
  [Disguise] as a different gender          1 minute
  [Disguise] as a different race            1 minute
  [Disguise] as a different age category    1 minute
  [Disguise] as a different size category   1 minute

*Quick Trapsmith (Ex)*: As a full-round action, a rogue with this
talent can set a simple trap with a CR no greater than 1/2 her
rogue level. To do this, she must purchase the components, spend
the required time constructing the trap in advance, and have its
components at hand. The type of trap that can be constructed in
this way is subject to GM discretion.

*Snap Shot (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent may treat her
intitiative roll as a 20 for a surprise round, regardless of her
initiative, but she may only take an attack action with a ranged
weapon. Her normal initiative roll is used in subsequent
rounds. If two or more rogues possess this talent, their
initiative determines the order in which they act, but they all
go before any other creature. If a rogue is prevented from acting
in the surprise round, this talent has no effect.

*Sniper's Eye (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can apply her sneak
attack damage on ranged attacks targeting foes within 30 feet
that benefit from concealment. Foes with total concealment are
still immune.

*Strong Impression*: A rogue who selects this talent gains
 [Intimidating Prowess] as a bonus feat.

*Survivalist*: A rogue with this talent adds [Heal] and
[Survival] to her list of class skills.

*Swift Poison (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can apply poison to
a weapon as a move action, instead of a standard action.

**Advanced Rogue Talents**: The following new advanced rogue
talents can be selected by any rogue of 10th level or higher who
meets the prerequisites.

*Another Day (Ex)*: Once per day, when the rogue would be reduced
to 0 or fewer hit points by a melee attack, she can take a 5-foot
step as an immediate action. If the movement takes her out of the
reach of the attack, she takes no damage from the attack. The
rogue is staggered for 1 round on her next turn.

*Deadly Cocktail (Ex)*: A rogue with this talent can apply two
doses of poison to a weapon at once. These can be separate
poisons, in which case they both affect the target individually,
or two doses of the same toxin, in which case the poisons'
frequency is extended by 50% and the save DC increases by
+2. This talent is an exception to the rule that injury poisons
can only be delivered one dose at a time.

*Deadly Sneak\*\* (Ex)*: Whenever a rogue with this talent uses
the powerful sneak rogue talent, she treats all 1s and 2s on the
sneak attack damage dice as 3s. A rogue must have the powerful
sneak rogue talent before choosing this talent.

*Entanglement of Blades\*\* (Ex)*: When a rogue with this talent
hits a creature with a melee attack that deals sneak attack
damage, the target cannot take a 5-foot step until the beginning
of the rogue's next turn.

*Fast Tumble (Ex)*: When a rogue with this talent uses
[Acrobatics] to move at full speed through a threatened square
without provoking an attack of opportunity, the DC of the
[Acrobatics] check does not increase by 10.

*Frugal Trapsmith (Ex)*: When a rogue with this talent constructs
a mechanical trap, she only pays 75% of the normal cost.

*Hunter's Surprise (Ex)*: Once per day, a rogue with this talent
can designate a single enemy she is adjacent to as her
prey. Until the end of her next turn, she can add her sneak
attack damage to all attacks made against her prey, even if she
is not flanking it or it is not flat-footed.

*Knock-Out Blow (Ex)*: Once per day, the rogue can forgo her
sneak attack damage to attempt to knock out an opponent. She must
declare the use of knock-out blow before she makes the attack. If
the attack hits, it does normal damage, but instead of dealing
sneak attack damage (and instead of any effect that triggers when
the rogue deals sneak attack damage), the target falls
unconscious for 1d4 rounds. A successful Fortitude save reduces
this effect to staggered for 1 round. The DC of this save is
equal to 10 + 1/2 the rogue's level + the rogue's Intelligence
modifier.

*Master of Disguise (Ex)*: Once per day, a rogue with this talent
gains a +10 bonus on a single [Disguise] check.

*Redirect Attack (Ex)*: Once per day, when a rogue with this
talent is hit with a melee attack, she can redirect the attack to
strike at an adjacent creature with a free action. The creature
targeted must be within melee reach of the attack that hit the
rogue, and the creature that made the attack against the rogue
must make a new attack roll against the new target.

*Stealthy Sniper (Ex)*: When a rogue with this talent uses the
[Stealth] skill to snipe, she only suffers a -10 penalty on the
[Stealth] check, instead of -20.

*Thoughtful Reexamining (Ex)*: Once per day, a rogue with this
talent can reroll a [Knowledge], [Sense Motive], or [Perception]
skill check to try to gain new or better information from the
roll. This reroll can be made any time during the same day as the
original check.

### Acrobat

Agility and daring are both excellent rogue traits, and their
confluence can create spectacular feats of acrobatics. Whether
they are daring thieves, infiltrating assassins, or intrepid
spies, proper training in acrobatics is a valuable boon for
rogues.

**Expert Acrobat (Ex)**: At 1st level, an acrobat does not suffer
any armor check penalties on [Acrobatics], [Climb], [Fly],
[Sleight of Hand], or [Stealth] skill checks while wearing light
armor. When she is not wearing armor, she gains a +2 competency
bonus on [Acrobatics] and [Fly] skill checks. This ability
replaces trapfinding.

**Second Chance (Ex)**: At 3rd level, an acrobat can reroll any
[Acrobatics], [Climb], or [Fly] skill check she has just
made. This reroll is made at a -5 penalty. She must take the
second result, even if it is worse. An acrobat can use this
ability only once on any given skill check. She can use this
ability once per day at 3rd level, plus one additional time per
day for every 3 levels beyond 3rd. This ability replaces trap
sense.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
acrobat archetype: expert leaper, ledge walker\*, nimble climber,
peerless maneuver, rogue crawl\*, and stand up\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the acrobat archetype: defensive roll\*, fast getaway,
fast tumble, and improved evasion\*.

### Burglar

Adept at infiltration, trap removal, and lock picking, burglars
prey on the homes of the wealthy and forgotten tombs alike. Such
riches are guarded with vicious traps and hazards, but the
devious mind of the burglar allows her to find such dangers and
avoid them.

**Careful Disarm (Ex)**: At 4th level, whenever a burglar
attempts to disarm a trap using [Disable Device], she does not
spring the trap unless she fails by 10 or more. If she does set
off a trap she was attempting to disarm, she adds double her trap
sense bonus to avoid the trap. This ability replaces uncanny
dodge.

**Distraction (Ex)**: At 8th level, whenever a burglar is
detected while using [Stealth], she can immediately attempt a
[Bluff] skill check opposed by the [Sense Motive] skill of the
creature that spotted her. If this check succeeds, the target
assumes that the noise was something innocent and disregards the
detection. This only functions if the creature cannot see the
rogue.  This ability can only be used once during a given
[Stealth] attempt. If the same creature detects the rogue's
presence again, the ability has no effect.  This ability replaces
improved uncanny dodge.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
burglar archetype: fast picks, fast stealth\*, nimble climber,
quick disable\*, and trap spotter\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the burglar archetype: knock-out blow, skill
mastery\*, and thoughtful reexamining.

### Cutpurse

Everyone who lives in the city understands that a wealthy man
stays wealthy by guarding his purse while wandering the streets
and markets.  Cutpurses are often trained by guilds to collect
the guild's tax from local businesses on a daily basis, whether
through intimidation or pickpocketing. Some find themselves
taking up the mantle of adventurer, and their talents are
generally appreciated in this role, but the cutpurse is still the
first person her companions look to when an item goes missing.

**Measure the Mark (Ex)**: When a cutpurse makes a [Sleight of
Hand] check to take something from a creature, the target makes
its [Perception] check before the rogue makes her [Sleight of
Hand] check, and the rogue knows the [Perception] check
result. She can decide whether or not to make the check based on
the results of the target's [Perception] check. If the rogue
elects not to make the check, she can make a [Bluff] check,
opposed by the target's [Sense Motive], to prevent the target
from noticing the attempt. This ability replaces trapfinding.

**Stab and Grab (Ex)**: At 3rd level, as a full-round action, a
cutpurse can make an attack and also make a [Sleight of Hand]
check to steal something from the target of the attack. If the
attack deals sneak attack damage, the rogue can use [Sleight of
Hand] to take an item from the creature during combat; otherwise
this ability can only be used in a surprise round before the
target has acted. If the attack is successful, the target takes a
-5 penalty on the [Perception] check to notice the theft. This
ability replaces trap sense.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
cutpurse archetype: combat swipe, fast fingers, fast getaway,
hard to fool, minor magic\*, slow reactions\*, and surprise
attack\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the cutpurse archetype: crippling strike\*, fast
tumble, and skill mastery\*.

### Investigator

Not all rogues work against the law. Investigators use their
skills to serve the law, often in the employ of nobles or in the
pursuit of noble causes. In some cities cabals of investigators
work for rulers or bureaucracies, but often an investigator is a
free agent who pursues whatever mysteries come across her
path. Of course, not all investigators serve the law. Crime lords
and guildmasters often have squads of investigators serving their
own nefarious purposes.

**Follow Up (Ex)**: An investigator can roll twice on any
[Diplomacy] check made to gather information, and receives the
information for both results. This takes the same amount of time
as one check. If the lesser of the two checks reveals false
information, the rogue is aware of it. False information is not
revealed in this way if the people she questioned do not know it
to be false. This ability replaces trapfinding.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
investigator archetype: coax information, fast picks, follow
clues, hard to fool, and minor magic\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the investigator archetype: hunter's surprise,
slippery mind\*, and thought reexamining.

### Poisoner

Some consider poisoning an evil act. The poisoner knows poison is
just a tool toward an end, and is no different than any other
weapon. Some poisoners see themselves as great equalizers, as
they are able to craft weapons that the weakest of creatures can
wield to devastating effect, but most have no lofty delusions
about their work.

**Poison Use (Ex)**: At 1st level, a poisoner is trained in the
use of poison and cannot accidentally poison herself when
applying poison to a blade. This ability replaces trapfinding.

**Master Poisoner (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a poisoner can use
[Craft] (alchemy) to change the type of a poison. This requires 1
hour of work with an alchemist's lab and a [Craft] (alchemy)
skill check with a DC equal to the poison's DC. If successful,
the poison's type changes to contact, ingested, inhaled, or
injury. If the check fails, the poison is ruined. The poisoner
also receives a bonus on [Craft] (alchemy) skill checks when
working with poison equal to 1/2 her rogue level. This ability
replaces trap sense.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
poisoner archetype: distracting attack, lasting poison, surprise
attack\*, swift poison, and weapon training\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the poisoner archetype: deadly cocktail, hunter's
surprise, and opportunist\*.

### Rake

The rake is a rogue who is open about her skills and talents,
often to the point of being boastful. Usually she has the
protection of an important figure who finds her services useful,
but sometimes her bravado is enough to keep enemies away. She is
often used as a face for the group for diplomacy, gathering
information, negotiations, or to gain the most lucrative
contracts and quests from local authorities.

**Bravado's Blade (Ex)**: When a rake hits an opponent and deals
sneak attack damage, she can forgo 1d6 points of that damage and
make a free [Intimidate] check to demoralize the foe. For every
additional 1d6 points of sneak attack damage she forgoes, she
receives a +5 circumstance bonus on this check.  This ability
replaces trapfinding.

**Rake's Smile (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a rake gains a +1 morale
bonus on [Bluff] and [Diplomacy] checks. This bonus increases by
+1 for every 3 levels beyond 3rd. This ability replaces trap
sense.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
rake archetype: befuddling strike, charmer, honeyed words, and
surprise attack\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the rake archetype: another day, redirect attack, and
skill mastery\*.

### Scout

Not all rogues live in the city. Scouts frequently roam the
wilderness, often banding together as bandits, but sometimes
serving as guides, as trailblazers, or as companions to a ranger
or barbarian warrior. More comfortable with sneaking and hiding
outdoors, the scout is still effective in the city and the
dungeon.

**Scout's Charge (Ex)**: At 4th level, whenever a scout makes a
charge, her attack deals sneak attack damage as if the target
were flat-footed.  Foes with uncanny dodge are immune to this
ability. This ability replaces uncanny dodge.

**Skirmisher (Ex)**: At 8th level, whenever a scout moves more
than 10 feet in a round and makes an attack action, the attack
deals sneak attack damage as if the target was flat-footed. If
the scout makes more than one attack this turn, this ability only
applies to the first attack. Foes with uncanny dodge are immune
to this ability. This ability replaces improved uncanny dodge.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
scout archetype: assault leader, camouflage, cunning trigger,
survivalist, and trap spotter\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the scout archetype: hunter's surprise, skill
mastery\*, and stealthy sniper.

### Sniper

Some say that the sniper is the worst kind of assassin: a killer
who waits silently in the shadows and then strikes from a
distance without remorse. Snipers, of course, understand that
such protestations about “cowardice” and “honor” regarding their
profession are in fact merely the bleatings of sheep fearing the
slaughter and pay them no heed. Most snipers take pride in their
formidable abilities, which allow them to take life quickly,
quietly, and efficiently, then disappear into their surroundings
without a trace.

**Accuracy (Ex)**: At 1st level, a sniper halves all range
increment penalties when making ranged attacks with a bow or
crossbow. This ability replaces trapfinding.

**Deadly Range (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a sniper increases the range
at which she can apply her sneak attack damage by 10 feet. This
range increases by 10 feet for every 3 levels after 3rd. This
ability replaces trap sense.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
sniper archetype: camouflage, snap shot, sniper's eye, and weapon
training\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the sniper archetype: defensive roll\*, master of
disguise, and stealthy sniper.

### Spy

The best spies are like chameleons, but not only can they change
their appearances to fit the situation, they can also change
their personalities, allegiances, and even loves if that's what
it takes to achieve their clandestine goals. Spies are the
ultimate manipulators, and even those who commission their
services sometimes find that they've merely served the spies' own
interests.

**Skilled Liar (Ex)**: Whenever a spy uses [Bluff] to attempt to
deceive someone, she gains a bonus on the opposed roll equal to
1/2 her rogue level (minimum +1). This bonus does not apply to
feint attempts or attempts to pass secret messages. This ability
replaces trapfinding.

**Poison Use (Ex)**: A 3rd level, a spy is trained in the use of
poison and cannot accidentally poison herself when applying
poison to a blade.  This ability replaces trap sense.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the spy
archetype: canny observer, guileful polyglot, honeyed words,
major magic\*, minor magic\*, and quick disguise.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the spy archetype: crippling strike\*, master of
disguise, and stealthy sniper.

### Swashbuckler

A paragon of mobile swordplay, the swashbuckler is a rogue who
focuses almost exclusively on honing her skill at arms and
perfecting daring acrobatic moves and elaborate flourishes that
border on performance.

**Martial Training (Ex)**: At 1st level, the swashbuckler may
select one martial weapon to add to her list of weapon
proficiencies. In addition, she may take the combat trick rogue
talent up to two times. This ability replaces trapfinding.

**Daring (Ex)**: At 3rd level, a swashbuckler gains a +1 morale
bonus on [Acrobatics] checks and saving throws against fear. This
bonus increases by +1 for every 3 levels beyond 3rd. This ability
replaces trap sense.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
swashbuckler archetype: offensive defense, positioning attack,
powerful sneak, and weapon training\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the swashbuckler archetype: crippling strike\*,
entanglement of blades, and redirect attack.

### Thug

Some criminals steal with finesse, their victims only discovering
the crime when the rogue is long gone and the coin already
spent. A thug, on the other hand, cares nothing for
finesse. Through both threat and violence, the thug gets what she
wants by the promise of force, and has no problem making good on
that promise as needed.

**Frightening (Ex)**: Whenever a thug successfully uses
[Intimidate] to demoralize a creature, the duration of the shaken
condition is increased by 1 round.  In addition, if the target is
shaken for 4 or more rounds, the thug can instead decide to make
the target frightened for 1 round. This ability replaces
trapfinding.

**Brutal Beating (Ex)**: At 3rd level, whenever a thug deals
sneak attack damage, she can choose to forgo 1d6 points of sneak
attack damage to make the target sickened for a number of rounds
equal to 1/2 her rogue level. This ability does not stack with
itself—only the most recent duration applies. This ability
replaces trap sense.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
thug archetype: offensive defense, powerful sneak, strong
impression, and weapon training\*.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the thug archetype: crippling strike\*, deadly sneak,
and knock-out blow.

### Trapsmith

Some rogues are not content with just disabling traps—they love
to build them, finding a captivating beauty in the turning of
gears and the slither of ropes over pulleys. The trapsmith may
have started out putting together traps in order to better
understand how to disable them, but for most, it's long since
gone beyond that—they now relish the challenge of creating the
perfect combat machine.

**Careful Disarm (Ex)**: At 4th level, whenever a trapsmith
attempts to disarm a trap using [Disable Device], she does not
spring the trap unless she fails by 10 or more. If she does set
off a trap she was attempting to disarm, she adds double her trap
sense bonus to avoid the trap. This ability replaces uncanny
dodge.

**Trap Master (Ex)**: At 8th level, whenever a trapsmith disarms
a trap using [Disable Device], she can bypass it even if her
check did not exceed the DC by 10 or more.  If it is a magic trap
that allows specific creatures to pass it without danger, she can
modify which creatures it allows to pass, adding her allies and
restricting enemies if she desires. This ability replaces
improved uncanny dodge.

**Rogue Talents**: The following rogue talents complement the
trapsmith archetype: befuddling strike, cunning trigger, quick
disable\*, and quick trapsmith.

**Advanced Talents**: The following advanced rogue talents
complement the trapsmith archetype: another day, frugal
trapsmith, and skill mastery\*.


## Sorcerer

Filled with magical power that screams for release, sorcery is
not so much a calling as a blessing—or a curse. For some
sorcerers, this arcane birthright manifests in subtle and
carefully controlled ways, assisting in their manipulation of
others or the pursuit of lofty goals. For others, it is wild and
unpredictable, the primal and explosive lashing out of a power
greater than themselves. Presented below are a number of new
bloodlines representing the mysterious origin of your sorcerer's
abilities.

New spells presented in Chapter 5 are marked here with asterisks
(\*).

### Aquatic

Your family traces its heritage back to the ocean depths, whether
scions of undersea empires left in the wake of nomadic
sea-tribes, or the spawn of creeping ichthyic infiltrators into
remote seaside villages. The song of the sea hums in your blood,
calling the waves and all those within to your command.

**Class Skill**: [Swim].

**Bonus Spells**: *[Hydraulic Push]\**(3rd),
*[Slipstream]\**(5th), *[Aqueous Orb]\**(7th), [Geyser]\**(9th),
**[Control Water]*(11th), *[Beast Shape IV]*(13th), *[Summon
*Monster VII]*(15th), [Seamantle]\**(17th), *[World
*Wave]\**(19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Athletic], [Brew Potion], [Defensive Combat
Training], [Dodge], [Mobility], [Silent Spell], [Skill Focus]
([Swim]), [Toughness].

**Bloodline Arcana**: Whenever you cast a spell of the water
type, your effective caster level is increased by one, and
summoned creatures with a swim speed or the aquatic or water type
gain a +1 morale bonus on attack and damage rolls.

**Bloodline Powers**: Your seaborn magical talents awaken changes
in you, both mystical and physical, as you develop your powers.

*Dehydrating Touch (Sp)*: Starting at 1st level, you can make a
melee touch attack as a standard action that inflicts 1d6 points
of nonlethal damage + 1 for every two sorcerer levels you possess
and sickens the target for 1 round. Oozes, plants, and creatures
with the aquatic or water subtypes suffer lethal damage
instead. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal
to 3 + your Charisma modifier.

*Aquatic Adaptation (Ex)*: At 3rd level, you gain a swim speed of
30 feet. At 9th level, you gain the amphibious special quality
and develop a fat layer that grants a +1 natural armor bonus and
resist cold 5. When immersed in water, you gain blindsense 30
feet. At 15th level, you gain a swim speed of 60 feet and
blindsense of 60 feet in water.

*Aquatic Telepathy (Su)*: At 9th level, you gain telepathy (100
feet) and can communicate with creatures with a swim speed or the
aquatic or water types regardless of intelligence. You may cast
*[Suggestion]*on such creatures a number of times per day equal
to your Charisma modifier.  This ability is telepathic and does
not require audible or visual components. At 15th level, once per
day you can telepathically call and request a service from an
aquatic, water, or swimming creature as if using *[Demand]*or
*[Greater Planar Ally]*.

*Raise the Deep (Sp)*: At 15th level, you raise water as per
*[Control Water]*, but no water need be present. This created
water is stationary and does not flow out of the area where you
create it; it lasts 1 round per sorcerer level and then
disappears. At 20th level, the dimensions of the effect are
doubled. You may use this ability once per day.

*Deep One (Ex)*: At 20th level, you gain blindsense 60 feet and
your body is covered with fine, slippery scales granting DR
10/piercing, resist cold 20, and continuous *[Freedom of
Movement]*.  Underwater, you gain evasion and blindsight 120
feet, and you are immune to pressure damage from deep water.

### Boreal

Descended from inhabitants of the lands of ice and snow, you
count among your ancestors giant-kin, troll-born, and frost-rimed
spirits. Their savage and raw energies flow down through
generations to infuse you to the marrow with the chill of the
polar wind, crackling auroras, and the long winter's night.

**Class Skill**: [Survival].

**Bonus Spells**: *[Enlarge person]*(3rd), [Rage]*(5th),
**[Elemental Aura]\**(Cold Only) (7th), [Wall of Ice]*(9th),
**[Cone of Cold]*(11th), [Transformation]*(13th), [Giant Form
*I]*(15th), [Polar Ray]*(17th), *[Meteor Swarm]*(Dealing Cold
*Damage) (19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Arcane Strike], [Diehard], [Empower Spell],
[Endurance], [Exotic Weapon Proficiency], [Power Attack], [Skill
Focus] ([Intimidate]), [Toughness].

**Bloodline Arcana**: Whenever you cast a spell with the cold
descriptor, increase the spell's save DC by 1.

**Bloodline Powers**: Your connection to primeval winters grants
you a mastery of cold magic that few can match, and a savagery
that fewer still can withstand.

*Cold Steel (Sp)*: At 1st level, you can touch a weapon or up to
50 pieces of ammunition as a standard action, giving it the
*[Frost]* property for a number of rounds equal to 1/2 your
sorcerer level (minimum 1). At 9th level, you can confer the
*[Icy Burst]* property instead, but the duration of the power is
halved. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal
to 3 + your Charisma modifier.

*Icewalker (Ex)*: At 3rd level, you gain resist cold 5 and can
move across snow and icy surfaces without penalty and without
leaving tracks.  At 9th level, you gain resist cold 10 and can
climb icy surfaces as if using *[Spider Climb].*

*Snow Shroud (Su)*: At 9th level, you ignore concealment and
[Perception] penalties in natural or magical snow, ice, fog, and
similar weather conditions. In addition, you can surround
yourself with a cloak of swirling snow for a number of rounds per
day equal to your sorcerer level. This power acts and deals
damage as a *[Fire Shield] (chill [Shield])* that sheds no
light. It provides a 20% miss chance on attacks made against you
and grants a bonus on [Stealth] checks equal to 1/2 your sorcerer
level in snowy or icy areas. You can use this ability once per
day at 9th level, twice per day at 17th, and three times per day
at 20th.

*Blizzard (Sp)*: At 15th level, you can create a savage winter
storm centered on you. This power acts as *[Control Winds]*, but
in addition the entire area (not including the “eye” at the
center of the storm) is affected as a *[Sleet Storm]* and all in
the area are exposed to [Extreme Cold]. You may use this ability
once per day.

*Child of Ancient Winters (Su)*: At 20th level, you gain the cold
subtype and you become immune to fatigue and exhaustion. In
addition, you gain immunity to sneak attacks and critical
hits. This power causes you to gain vulnerability to fire.

### Deep Earth

The echoing cave-songs and the rumble and creak of primal spirits
deep below the ground thrum in your soul and in all your family
line. You are likely slow, steady, and stable in your thinking,
little prone to wandering and preferring to instead find depth in
contemplation.

**Class Skill**: [Knowledge] (dungeoneering).

**Bonus Spells**: *[Expeditious Excavation]\**(3rd),
*[Darkvision]*(5th), [Shifting Sand]\**(7th), [Stoneskin]*(9th),
**[Spike Stones]*(11th), *[Stone Tell]*(13th), *[Repel Metal or
*Stone]*(15th), [Earthquake]*(17th), [Clashing Rocks]\**(19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Acrobatic Steps], [Alertness], [Blind-Fight],
[Forge Ring], [Nimble Moves], [Skill Focus] ([Perception]),
[Stealthy], [Still Spell].

**Bloodline Arcana**: Whenever you and the target of your spell
are both underground, increase the spell's save DC by +1.

**Bloodline Powers**: The powers of the living rock are within
you, and your communion with the strength of stone is refined and
enhanced as your power grows.

*Tremor (Sp)*: At 1st level, as a standard action, you can cause
the ground to shake beneath a single creature within 30 feet,
functioning as a trip maneuver using your sorcerer level plus
your Charisma modifier in place of your CMB. You can use this
ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Charisma
modifier.

*Rockseer (Su)*: At 3rd level, you gain the stonecunning trait as
a dwarf; if already a dwarf, your bonus improves to +4. At 9th
level, you gain tremorsense 30 feet. At 15th level, you can see
through solid objects as if using a *[Ring of X-ray Vision]* for
a number of rounds per day equal to your sorcerer level. These
rounds do not need to be consecutive.

*Crystal Shard (Sp)*: At 9th level, you can touch a metal or
stone weapon (or up to 50 pieces of ammunition) as a standard
action, giving it the *[Bane]* property against any creature with
the earth subtype, oozes, or constructs made of stone or metal,
for 1 minute. You can use this ability once per day at 9th level,
twice per day at 17th, and three times per day at 20th.

*Earth [Glide] (Ex)*: At 15th level, you can glide through any
sort of natural earth or stone as easily as a fish swims through
water, with a burrow speed equal to half your normal speed. You
do not leave a tunnel or trace of your passage. You can use this
ability for 1 minute per sorcerer level each day. The duration
need not be continuous, but it must be used in 1-minute
increments.

*Strength of Stone (Su)*: At 20th level, your flesh becomes as
hard as stone, giving you DR 10/adamantine, and you become immune
to petrification. You suffer no penalties while squeezing through
tight spaces and are immune to bull rush, drag, grapple,
reposition, and trip maneuvers, and to push and pull effects as
long as you are standing on the ground.

### Dreamspun

Your family is a long line of dreamers, who dream not as ordinary
mortals do but rather as those who reach through and touch the
supernal realm of dreams and the farthest shores of
night. Whether it is a gift or curse is not always clear, but
your visions of the past and future call you ineluctably to a
life of adventure.

**Class Skill**: [Sense Motive].

**Bonus Spells**: *[Sleep]*(3rd), [Augury]*(5th), *[Deep
*Slumber]*(7th), [Divination]*(9th), [Dream]*(11th), *[Shadow
*Walk]*(13th), [Vision]*(15th), *[Moment of Prescience]*(17th),
*[Astral Projection]*(19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Alertness], [Blind-Fight], [Combat Expertise],
[Deceitful], [Heighten Spell], [Improved Feint], [Persuasive],
[Skill Focus] ([Sense Motive]).

**Bloodline Arcana**: Whenever you target a single creature with
a spell, you gain an insight bonus equal to half the spell's
level (minimum +1) for 1 round to your AC and saving throws
against any spell or attack made by that creature.

**Bloodline Powers**: You reach out into and through the world of
dreams to touch the minds and destinies of those around you.

*[Lullaby] (Sp)*: At 1st level, you can use *[Lullaby]*as a
spell-like ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your
Charisma modifier.  This effect lasts for 1 minute and does not
require concentration. The penalty on saves versus sleep effects
increases to -4.

*Combat Precognition (Su)*: Your insight into the future grants
you an advantage in combat. At 3rd level and every 4 levels
thereafter, you gain a +1 insight bonus on initiative checks.

*Dreamshaper (Sp)*: At 9th level, you can manipulate the
dreamscape of others, drawing forth or tampering with their
subconscious minds. This power allows you to tamper with the
target's memories as if using *[Modify Memory],*or you may ask
questions as if using *[Speak with Dead]*upon a corpse. A
successful Will save negates the effect. The DC of this save is
equal to 10 + 1/2 your sorcerer level + your Charisma modifier,
with further modifiers as the *[Nightmare]*spell. You can use
this ability once per day at 9th level. At 17th level you can use
this ability twice per day, and at 20th, three times per day.

*Eye of Somnus (Sp)*: At 15th level, you can project your
consciousness as if using *[Arcane Eye]*. In addition, at any
point you can cause the *[Arcane Eye]*to become visible. The eye
can no longer be moved, but it acts as a *[Symbol of Sleep]*to
all who see it. You may use this power once per day.

*Solipsism (Ex)*: At 20th level, you can drift into the dream
world, fading from the world around you. You can become
incorporeal for 1 minute per sorcerer level. You gain the
incorporeal subtype and take only half damage from corporeal
magical attacks (you take no damage from nonmagical weapons and
objects). Your spells deal only half damage to corporeal
creatures, but spells and abilities that do not deal damage
function normally. The duration need not be continuous, but it
must be used in 1-minute increments.

### Protean

You have in your veins the ever-changing wildness of primal
chaos, the raw essence of unbound creation. Your mind and spirit
burst with the constant inspiration of consummate freedom, though
you have difficulty following through on a task when another, new
and exciting, catches your interest.

**Class Skill**: [Knowledge] (planes).

**Bonus Spells**: *[Entropic Shield]*(3rd), [Blur]*(5th),
**[Gaseous Form]*(7th), [Confusion]*(9th), *[Major
*Creation]*(11th), [Disintegrate]*(13th), [Greater
*Polymorph]*(15th), [Polymorph Any Object]*(17th),
*[Shapechange]*(19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Agile Maneuvers], [Defensive Combat Training],
[Enlarge Spell], [Great Fortitude], [Improved Great Fortitude],
[Skill Focus] ([Craft] [any]), [Spell Focus], [Toughness].

**Bloodline Arcana**: Your magic of creation and changing is hard
to unravel. The DC to dispel transmutation or conjuration
(creation) spells that you cast is increased by +4.

**Bloodline Powers**: Your ancestral immersion in primordial
chaos begets your curiously warped magical talents.

*Protoplasm (Sp)*: At 1st level, you can create a ball of
entropic protoplasm and hurl it at targets within 30 feet. This
protoplasm acts as a tanglefoot bag that also inflicts 1 point of
acid damage per round to a creature entangled by it. The
protoplasm dissolves within 1d3 rounds. You may use this ability
a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Charisma modifier.

*Protean Resistances (Ex)*: At 3rd level, you gain resist acid 5
and a +2 bonus on saving throws against polymorph, petrification,
and transmutation spells or effects. At 9th level, you gain
resist acid 10 and your save bonus increases to +4.

*Reality Wrinkle (Sp)*: At 9th level, you can surround yourself
with a mobile, 10-foot-radius emanation of mutable reality. This
rippling distortion is similar to *[Solid Fog]* but does not
provide concealment or block line of sight. Your movement is not
slowed by this aura. Attacks from outside the aura suffer a 20%
miss chance against targets inside the aura. You may use this
ability a number of rounds per day equal to your sorcerer level,
though this duration need not be continuous.

*Spatial Tear (Sp)*: At 15th level, once per day, you can unravel
the fibers of reality and ride along them as they snap back into
place. This power functions as *[Dimension Door],*while also
creating a mass of *[Black Tentacles]*centered on your former
location. Both of these effects use your sorcerer level as the
caster level. At 20th level, you can use this ability twice per
day.

*Avatar of Chaos (Ex)*: At 20th level, you are infused with the
essence of raw chaos. You gain immunity to acid, petrification,
and polymorph effects (except when cast on self), as well as a +2
bonus to save DCs and on checks to overcome spell penetration
against creatures with the lawful subtype.

### Serpentine

Your bloodline carries the lingering stain of ancient serpent
races that ruled when the world was young; your forebears were
likely favored slaves anointed by their reptilian masters and
gifted with their cold cunning and subtle manipulation. While
deception and a mesmeric charm are your birthright, you may
struggle for truth in spite of your heritage.

**Class Skill**: [Diplomacy].

**Bonus Spells**: [Hypnotism]*(3rd), *[Delay Poison]*(5th),
**[Summon Monster Iii]*(Reptiles Only) (7th), *[Poison]*(9th),
**[Hold Monster]*(11th), *[Mass Suggestion]*(13th), [Summon
*Monster VII]*(Reptiles Only) (15th), *[Irresistible
*Dance]*(17th), [Dominate Monster]*(19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Combat Casting], [Combat Reflexes],
[Deceitful], [Deft Hands], [Persuasive], [Silent Spell], [Skill
Focus] ([Bluff]), [Stealthy].

**Bloodline Arcana**: Your powers of compulsion can affect even
bestial creatures. Whenever you cast a mind-affecting or
language-dependent spell, it affects animals, magical beasts, and
monstrous humanoids as if they were humanoids who understood your
language.

**Bloodline Powers**: The treacherous and yet hypnotic serpent's
blood that flows through you taints your magic with a sinuous and
seductive grace.

*Serpent's Fang (Ex)*: At 1st level, you can grow fangs as a free
action. These fangs are treated as a natural weapon inflicting
1d4 points of damage plus your Strength modifier (1d3 if you are
Small) plus poison (Bite—injury; *save* Fort DC 10 + 1/2 your
sorcerer level + your Constitution modifier; *frequency*1/round
for 6 rounds; *effect*1 Con damage; *cure*1 save). At 5th level,
these fangs are considered magical for the purpose of overcoming
DR and the poison damage increases to 1d2 Con. At 7th level, your
poison requires 2 successful saves to cure. At 11th level, your
poison damage increases to 1d4 Con. You can use your fangs for a
number of rounds per day equal to 3 + your Charisma modifier.

*Serpentfriend (Ex)*: At 3rd level, you can use *[Speak with
Animals]*at will with reptilian animals (including various forms
of dinosaurs, lizards, and other cold-blooded creatures), and you
gain a viper familiar using your sorcerer level -2 as your
effective wizard level.

*Snakeskin (Ex)*: At 9th level, you gain a +1 bonus to natural
armor, a +2 racial bonus on saves against poison, and a +2 bonus
on [Escape Artist] checks. At 13th level and 17th level, these
bonuses increase by +1.

*Den of Vipers (Sp)*: At 15th level, you may summon a host of
writhing serpents. This power acts as *[Creeping Doom],*but the
swarms' poison inflicts Con damage and any creature other than
you sharing a space with a swarm is entangled.

*Scaled Soul (Su)*: At 20th level, you gain the shapechanger
subtype, and you can assume the form of a reptilian humanoid (as
*[Alter Self]*) or snake of Diminutive to Huge size (as *[Beast
Shape III]*) at will. You retain the power of speech and the
ability to use somatic spell components when transformed. You
also become immune to poison and paralysis. You may use serpent's
fang as often as desired, and you may choose to inflict damage to
any ability score.

### Shadow

Spirits from the shadow plane dally at times in the world of
light, and such as these lay with your ancestors once upon a
time, imparting the mystery of shadow-stuff into your
lineage. You are often sullen and withdrawn, preferring to skulk
at the fringes of social circles and keep to yourself,
cultivating an air of mystery and majesty that is all your own.

**Class Skill**: [Stealth].

**Bonus Spells**: *[Ray of Enfeeblement]*(3rd),
*[Darkvision]*(5th), *[Deeper Darkness]*(7th), *[Shadow
Conjuration]*(9th), [Shadow Evocation]*(11th), *[Shadow
Walk]*(13th), [Power Word Blind]*(15th), *[Greater
Evocation]*(17th), *[Shades]*(19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Acrobatic], [Blind-Fight], [Dodge], [Quick
Draw], [Silent Spell], [Skill Focus] ([Stealth]), [Stealthy],
[Weapon Finesse].

**Bloodline Arcana**: Whenever you cast a spell with the darkness
descriptor or the shadow subschool, you gain a circumstance bonus
on [Stealth] checks equal to the spell's level for 1d4 rounds.

**Bloodline Powers**: Your benighted heritage infuses your
mastery of magic with the essence of shadowstuff.

*Shadowstrike (Sp)*: At 1st level, you can make a melee touch
attack as a standard action that inflicts 1d4 points of nonlethal
damage + 1 for every two sorcerer levels you possess. In
addition, the target is dazzled for 1 minute. Creatures with
low-light vision or darkvision are not dazzled by this
ability. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal
to 3 + your Charisma modifier.

*Nighteye (Ex)*: At 3rd level, you gain darkvision 30 feet. At
9th level, you gain darkvision 60 feet. If you already possess
darkvision, its range is increased by these amounts.

*[Shadow] Well (Sp)*: At 9th level, you can use the [Stealth]
skill even while being observed and without cover or concealment,
as long as you are within 10 feet of a shadow other than your
own. In addition, when within an area of darkness or dim light,
as a standard action you may choose to switch places with a
willing ally within 60 feet, who must also be in darkness or dim
light. At 13th level, you can instead switch the positions of two
willing allies, each of whom must be within 60 feet of
you. Unless otherwise noted, this travel is identical to
*[Dimension Door]*.  You may use the ability to switch places
once per day at 9th level, plus one additional time per day at
17th level and 20th level.

*Enveloping Darkness (Sp)*: At 15th level, you may create an area
*of [Deeper Darkness]* that you can see through without
*penalty. All creatures except you are entangled within this
*darkness unless using *[Freedom of Movement]*or a similar
*effect. You may use this ability once per day.

*[Shadow] Master (Su)*: At 20th level, you can see perfectly in
natural or magical darkness. When you use *[Shadow Conjuration]*
or *[Shadow Evocation]*spells, your creations are 20% more real,
and any creatures you create gain the benefits of the [Augment
Summoning] feat.

### Starsoul

You come from a line of stargazers and explorers who delved
deeply into the darkness beyond the stars. In touching the void,
the void touched them, and your mind, spirit, and body yearn to
span the gulf between worlds.

**Class Skill**: [Knowledge] (nature).

**Bonus Spells**: *[Unseen Servant]*(3rd), [Glitterdust]*(5th),
*[Blink]*(7th), *[Call Lightning Storm]*(9th; dealing fire
*damage, damage increased outdoors at night), *[Overland
*Flight]*(11th), [Repulsion]*(13th), *[Reverse Gravity]*(15th),
*[Greater Prying Eyes]*(17th), [Meteor Swarm]*(19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Blind-Fight], [Craft Rod], [Endurance],
[Improved Counterspell], [Improved Iron Will], [Iron Will],
[Quicken Spell], [Skill Focus] ([Perception]), [Toughness].

**Bloodline Arcana**: Whenever you cast an evocation spell,
targets that fail their saves are dazzled by tiny sparkling
starlights for 1 round per level of the spell.

**Bloodline Powers**: Your skyward gaze and communion with the
heavens focus and enhance your magical talents.

*Minute Meteors (Sp)*: At 1st level, you can summon a rain of
tiny meteorites as a standard action to fall in a 5-foot column,
30 feet high, with a range of 30 feet. The meteors inflict 1d4
points of fire damage + 1 per 2 sorcerer levels. A Reflex save
negates this damage. The save DC is equal to 10 + 1/2 your
sorcerer level + your Charisma modifier. You may use this ability
a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Charisma modifier.

*Voidwalker (Ex)*: At 3rd level, you gain low-light vision and
resist cold and fire 5. At 9th level, you no longer need to
breathe, as if wearing a *[Necklace of Adaptation]*.

*Aurora Borealis (Sp)*: At 9th level, you can create a sheet of
cascading colors. This power acts as a *[Wall of Fire]*, but it
inflicts cold damage and does not radiate heat. However, one side
of the aurora designated by you fascinates creatures within 10
feet, up to a maximum of 2 HD of creatures per sorcerer level. A
Will save negates this fascinate effect. The save DC is equal to
10 + 1/2 your sorcerer level + your Charisma modifier. You may
use this ability for a number of rounds per day equal to your
sorcerer level. These rounds do not need to be consecutive.

*Breaching the Gulf (Sp)*: At 15th level, your caster level is
increased by 3 when casting spells of the teleportation
subschool. In addition, once per day you can teleport a single
creature within 30 feet into the void of space if it fails a Will
save. The save DC is equal to 10 + 1/2 your sorcerer level + your
Charisma modifier. The target can attempt a new saving throw as a
full-round action each round to return. While trapped in the
airless void, the target takes 6d6 points of cold damage per
round and must hold its breath or begin to suffocate.

*Starborn (Ex)*: At 20th level, you gain immunity to cold and
blindness, and you can see perfectly in natural or magical
darkness. In addition, you gain fast healing 1 when you are
outdoors at night.

### Stormborn

You trace your heritage to fierce and proud spirits of storm and
sky, and living lightning sings in your veins.

**Class Skill**: [Knowledge] (nature).

**Bonus Spells**: *[Shocking Grasp]*(3rd), *[Gust of Wind]*(5th),
**[Lightning Bolt]*(7th), [Shout]*(9th), *[Overland
*Flight]*(11th), [Chain Lightning]*(13th), [Control
*Weather]*(15th), [Whirlwind]*(17th), *[Storm of
*Vengeance]*(19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Deadly Aim], [Dodge], [Enlarge Spell], [Far
Shot], [Great Fortitude], Point Blank Shot, [Skill Focus]
([Fly]), [Wind Stance].

**Bloodline Arcana**: Whenever you cast a spell with the
electricity or sonic descriptor, increase the save DC by 1.

**Bloodline Powers**: Your mastery of the storm is reflected in
the unique panoply of powers you manifest.

*Thunderstaff (Sp)*: At 1st level, you can touch a weapon as a
standard action, giving it the *[Shock]* property for a number of
rounds equal to 1/2 your sorcerer level (minimum 1). At 9th
level, you can confer the *[Shocking Burst]* property instead,
but the duration of the power is halved. You can use this ability
a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Charisma modifier.

*Stormchild (Ex)*: At 3rd level, you gain resist electricity 5
and resist sonic 5, and treat wind effects as being one step less
severe. At 9th level, you treat wind effects as being two steps
less severe and gain blindsense 60 feet against concealment from
natural or magical fog, mist, or weather effects.

*Thunderbolt (Sp)*: At 9th level, you can command a stroke of
lightning to strike from above in a 5-foot-radius cylinder 60
feet high. The thunderbolt inflicts 1d6 points of damage per
sorcerer level; half of this damage is electricity and half is
sonic. A Reflex save (DC 10 + 1/2 your sorcerer level + your
Charisma modifier) halves this damage.  Creatures failing their
saves are deafened for 1 round. At 9th level, you can use this
ability once per day, at 17th twice per day, and at 20th three
times per day. This power has a range of 120 feet.

*[Ride] the Lightning (Sp)*: At 15th level, as a full-round
action you can become a living lightning bolt and move in a
straight line up to 10 times your speed. You do not provoke
attacks of opportunity while moving in this way. Creatures or
objects in your path are affected as by your thunderbolt
power. Creatures do not block your movement but solid barriers do
unless they are reduced to 0 hit points. You can use this power
once per day for a number of rounds equal to your sorcerer level.

*Storm Lord (Ex)*: At 20th level, you are one with the storm. You
gain immunity to deafness, stunning, and wind effects and gain
blindsight 120 feet against concealment from natural or magical
fog, mist, or weather.  Once per day, when attacked with an
electricity or sonic effect, you may forgo your saving throw and
absorb the energies of the attack, healing 1 point of damage for
every 3 points of damage the attack would otherwise have dealt.

### Verdant

Your progenitors infused themselves with raw plant life, binding
it into their own tissue and passing it down to their literal
seed, giving you innate communion with nature.

**Class Skill**: [Knowledge] (nature).

**Bonus Spells**: [Entangle]*(3rd), [Barkskin]*(5th), *[Speak
with Plants]*(7th), [Command Plants]*(9th), *[Wall of
Thorns]*(11th), [Transport via Plants]*(13th), *[Plant Shape
III]*(15th), *[Animate Plants]*(17th), [Shambler]*(19th).

**Bonus Feats**: [Acrobatic Steps], [Craft Staff], [Endurance],
[Extend Spell], [Fleet], [Nimble Moves], [Skill Focus]
([Knowledge] [nature]), [Toughness].

**Bloodline Arcana**: Whenever you cast a spell with a range of
personal, your skin toughens, granting you a natural armor bonus
equal to the spell's level for 1d4 rounds. This bonus does not
stack with any other natural armor bonuses you might have.

**Bloodline Powers**: The power of living things infuses every
aspect of your magic, as you draw power from nature and its life
energies flow through you.

*Tanglevine (Sp)*: At 1st level, as a standard action, you can
create a 15-foot-long, animated vine that springs from your
hand. This vine lasts for 1 round and can be used to make a
single disarm, steal, or trip combat maneuver, using your
sorcerer level plus your Charisma modifier in place of your
normal CMB. You can use this power a number of times per day
equal to 3 + your Charisma modifier.

*Photosynthesis (Ex)*: At 3rd level, you feed upon nature's raw
essence.  Your need to eat and sleep is reduced as if wearing a
*[Ring of Sustenance]*, and you gain a +2 racial bonus on saving
throws made against poison and sleep effects. At 9th level, these
bonuses increase to +4.

*Massmorph (Sp)*: At 9th level, as a full-round action, you can
alter the size and health of plant life, as if using *[Plant
Growth]*or *[Diminish Plants]*.  Alternatively, you can transform
one willing non-plant creature per sorcerer level (no two of
which can be more than 30 feet apart) as *[Tree Shape]*. You may
transform creatures as *[Plant Shape I]*at 15th level, or *[plant
shape II]* at 20th level. You can transform non-plant creatures
using this power once per day.

*Rooting (Ex)*: At 15th level, as a move action, you can extend
roots into the ground. Your speed is reduced to 5 feet, but you
gain a +4 bonus to natural armor and a +10 bonus to CMD against
bull rush, overrun, reposition, and trip maneuvers. You also gain
tremorsense 30 feet and fast healing 1. You can use this power
for a number of minutes per day equal to your sorcerer
level. This duration need not be consecutive, but it must be used
in 1-minute increments.

*Shepherd of the Trees (Su)*: At 20th level, your verdant
heritage fully manifests. You gain a +4 natural armor bonus. You
gain immunity to paralysis, poison, polymorph, sleep, and
stunning, and you gain tremorsense 30 feet even when not rooted.


## Wizard

Bending reality to their will through careful study, wizards are
the embodiment of the phrase “mind over matter,” changing whole
worlds with nothing but their keen intellects and ancient
lore. In their quest to unravel and repurpose the fundamental
laws of existence, many wizards come to appreciate the benefits
of narrowly focusing their study.  Presented below are several
new schools of magic to help you customize your wizard's arcane
pursuits.

### Elemental Arcane Schools

Instead of specializing in one of the standard eight schools of
magic, a wizard can choose to specialize in one of the four
elemental schools of magic. Like a normal arcane school, an
elemental school grants a number of school powers and one bonus
spell slot of each level the wizard can cast, from 1st on
up. This bonus spell slot must be used to prepare a spell from
the elemental school's spell list (see Chapter 5). Unlike a
normal arcane school, each elemental school requires the wizard
to select his opposed element as his opposition school (air
opposes earth, fire opposes water). He does not need to select a
second opposition school. He must expend two spell slots to
prepare a spell from his opposed elemental school as normal.

#### Air School

The air elementalist uses the forces of the wind, sky, clouds,
and lightning to confuse and destroy his foes, all while flying
through the air with ease.

*Air Supremacy (Su)*: You gain a +2 enhancement bonus on [Fly]
skill checks. This bonus increases by +1 for every five wizard
levels you possess. In addition, you can cast *[Feather Fall]* on
yourself at will. At 5th level, you can cast *[Levitate]* on
yourself at will.  At 10th level, you can cast *[Fly]*on yourself
at will. At 20th level, whenever you make a [Fly] skill check,
assume the roll resulted in a natural 20.

*Lightning Flash (Su)*: As a standard action, you can unleash a
flash of electricity. This flash deals 1d6 points of electricity
damage + 1 point for every two wizard levels you possess to all
creatures within 5 feet of you and dazzles them for 1d4 rounds. A
successful Reflex save negates the dazzled effect and halves the
damage. The DC of this save is equal to 10 + 1/2 your wizard
level + your Intelligence modifier. You can use this ability a
number of times per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

*Cyclone (Su)*: At 8th level, you can create a vortex of
turbulent wind around yourself as a standard action. This vortex
has a radius of up to 10 feet and a maximum height of 10 feet per
wizard level you possess.  Any ranged attack passing through this
vortex automatically misses. Any flying creature moving through
the vortex must make a [Fly] skill check or immediately fall from
the sky, taking falling damage (the creature cannot make a [Fly]
check to reduce or negate this damage). Creatures on the ground
cannot pass through the vortex without first making a Strength
check. The DC of this check is equal to 10 + your caster
level. The vortex is faintly visible and can be spotted with a DC
15 [Perception] skill check. You can use this ability for a
number of rounds per day equal to your wizard level. These rounds
do not need to be consecutive.

#### Earth School

The earth elementalist draws power from the stone around him,
shaping it, shattering it, and bending it to his will. He can use
it to defend himself or cause it to rise up and crush his foes.

*Earth Supremacy (Su)*: You gain a +2 enhancement bonus to your
CMD to resist bull rush, reposition, trip, and overrun attempts
as long as you are touching the ground. This bonus increases by
+1 for every five wizard levels you possess. In addition, you
gain a +1 insight bonus on melee attack and damage rolls whenever
both you and your foe are touching the ground. At 20th level,
earth and stone do not block the line of effect of your spells,
although they do still block your line of sight.

*Acid Cloud (Su)*: As a standard action, you can create a
5-foot-radius cloud of acid vapor within 30 feet that lasts for 1
round. This cloud deals 1d6 points of acid damage + 1 point for
every two wizard levels you possess to all creatures in the cloud
and sickens them for 1 round.  A successful Fortitude save
negates the sickened effect and halves the damage. The DC of this
save is equal to 10 + 1/2 your wizard level + your Intelligence
modifier. Creatures that begin their turn inside the cloud can
move out that turn without penalty, but those that enter the
cloud are affected. You can use this ability a number of times
per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

*Earth Glide (Su)*: At 8th level, you gain the ability to move
through earth, dirt, and stone for a number of rounds per day
equal to your wizard level. You cannot move through worked earth
or stone; only natural substances can be traversed. If your total
duration expires before you exit the earth, you are flung back to
the point where you entered the stone, take 4d6 points of damage,
and are stunned for 1 round. Your burrowing does not leave a
hole, nor does it give any sign of your presence (although you
can be detected by creatures with tremorsense). These rounds do
not need to be consecutive.

#### Fire School

The fire elementalist sees a world around him that is made to
burn, and he can bring that fire to consume his foes. He has also
learned that fire can purify and protect, if properly controlled.

*Fire Supremacy (Su)*: You gain resistance 5 to fire. At 10th
level, this resistance increases to 10. At 20th level, you gain
immunity to fire damage. In addition, whenever you are within 5
feet of a source of flame at least as large as a campfire, you
can draw the fire around you for 1 round as a swift
action. Anyone striking you with a melee weapon or unarmed strike
takes an amount of fire damage equal to 1/2 your wizard level
(minimum 1). Weapons with reach avoid this damage.

*Fire Jet (Su)*: As a standard action, you can send forth a
20-foot line of fire. Anyone in this line takes 1d6 points of
fire damage + 1 point for every two wizard levels you possess. A
successful Reflex save halves this damage. The DC of this save is
equal to 10 + 1/2 your wizard level + your Intelligence
modifier. Creatures that fail their saving throw catch fire and
take 1d6 points of fire damage on the following round.  Creatures
that catch fire can avoid this damage by taking a full-round
action to extinguish the flames by making a DC 15 Reflex
save. Rolling on the ground gives a +2 circumstance bonus on the
save. Dousing the creature with water automatically extinguishes
the flame. You can use this ability a number of times per day
equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

*Dancing Flame (Su)*: At 8th level, as a standard action, you can
sculpt fire to suit your desires. With one use of this ability
you can move any nonmagical fire up to 30 feet. Alternatively you
can use this ability to alter any fire spell that you cast with a
duration of instantaneous by removing any number of squares from
its area of affect. If the fire spell has a duration, you can use
this ability to reposition the spell, within its original range
(treat this as if you had just cast the spell, even though the
duration is unchanged). You cannot use this ability on a fire
spell that you did not cast. If you move a nonmagical flame, it
must have a new source of fuel. If it does not, it is
extinguished in one round. You can use this ability a number of
times per day equal to 1/2 your wizard level.

#### Water School

The water elementalist draws magic from the ocean depths. His
power is fluid as well, crushing foes in mighty waves or wearing
them down through timeless erosion.

*Water Supremacy (Su)*: You gain a +2 enhancement bonus on [Swim]
skill checks. This bonus increases by +1 for every five wizard
levels you possess. In addition, you can hold your breath for a
number of rounds equal to four times your Constitution score
before you must start making checks to avoid drowning. At 10th
level, you gain a swim speed equal to your base speed.  At 20th
level, whenever you make a [Swim] skill check, assume the roll
resulted in a natural 20.

*Cold Blast (Su)*: As a standard action, you can unleash a blast
of freezing cold. This blast deals 1d6 points of cold damage + 1
point for every two wizard levels you possess to all creatures
within 5 feet of you and staggers them for 1 round. A successful
Reflex save negates the staggered effect and halves the
damage. The DC of this save is equal to 10 + 1/2 your wizard
level + your Intelligence modifier. You can use this ability a
number of times per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

*Wave (Su)*: At 8th level, you can create a wave of water that
starts at your location and moves 30 feet per round away from you
in a direction of your choosing. Creatures struck by the wave
might be knocked down and pushed away. Make a caster level check
against the CMD of each creature struck. If you succeed, the
creature is knocked prone. If your check exceeds the CMD of the
creature by 5 or more, it is carried with the wave during the
wave's movement this round. You receive a +5 bonus on this check
if the creature shares its space with the wave at the start of
your turn (when the wave moves). Creatures carried in this way
can move out of the wave on their turn if they succeed on a
Strength check (DC = 10 + 1/2 your caster level + your
Intelligence modifier), but they cannot breathe while sharing
space with the wave. The wave is up to 20 feet high and up to 5
feet long for each wizard level you possess.  Nonmagical fires
hit by the wave are automatically extinguished. Magical fire
effects are unaffected. You can use this ability for a number of
rounds per day equal to 1/2 your wizard level.

### Focused Arcane Schools

Wizards that specialize in one of the schools of magic can
instead chose to focus their studies still further. Wizards who
choose a focused arcane school retain the bonus spells from their
school and must select two prohibited schools as normal, but the
focused school changes one or more of the powers granted by their
arcane school. A wizard must take all of the replacement powers
associated with his focused arcane school.  Once a focused arcane
school is chosen, it cannot be changed.

#### Admixture School

**Associated School**: Evocation.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
force missile and elemental wall powers of the evocation school.

**Versatile Evocation (Su)**: When you cast an evocation spell
that does acid, cold, electricity, or fire damage, you may change
the damage dealt to one of the other four energy types. This
changes the descriptor of the spell to match the new energy
type. Any non-damaging effects remain unchanged unless the new
energy type invalidates them (an *[Ice Storm]* that deals fire
damage might still provide a penalty on [Perception] checks due
to smoke, but it would not create difficult terrain). Such
effects are subject to GM discretion. You can use this ability a
number of times per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

**Elemental Manipulation (Su)**: At 8th level, you can emit a
30-foot aura that transforms magical energy. Choose an energy
type from acid, cold, electricity, and fire, and a second type to
transform it into. Any magical source of energy of this type with
a caster level equal to or less than your wizard level is altered
to the chosen energy type. This includes supernatural effects
from creatures with Hit Dice no greater than your caster
level. For example, you could transform a white dragon's frigid
breath weapon (a supernatural ability), but not a fire
elemental's fiery touch (an extraordinary ability). If an effect
lies only partially within your aura, only the portions within
the aura are transformed. You can use this ability for a number
of rounds per day equal to your wizard level. The rounds do not
need to be consecutive.

#### Banishment School

**Associated School**: Abjuration.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
energy absorption power and the protective ward power of the
abjuration school.

**Unstable Bonds (Su)**: At 1st level, your touch can disrupt the
bonds that hold a summoned or called creature on this plane. As a
melee touch attack, you can cause a summoned or called creature
to become shaken and staggered for a number of rounds equal to
1/2 your wizard level (minimum 1). You can use this ability a
number of times per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

**Aura of Banishment (Su)**: At 8th level, you can emit a 30-foot
aura of banishment for a number of rounds per day equal to your
wizard level.  Any summoned or called creature in the area must
make a Will save each round. Once the creature fails a Will
saving throw, it is staggered as long as it remains inside the
aura. If it fails a second Will saving throw, it is immediately
sent back to its home plane and the spell that summoned it
immediately ends. If that spell summoned more than one creature,
only the creature that failed its saving throws is affected.
These rounds do not need to be consecutive.

#### Controller School

**Associated School**: Enchantment.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
enchanting smile and aura of despair powers of the enchantment
school.

**Force of Will (Su)**: You can send thoughts and instructions
telepathically to any creature within 60 feet that you have
charmed or dominated as though you shared a common language. At
11th level, affected creatures can communicate back to you via
the telepathic link as well. At 20th level, any creature that
succeeds at a saving throw against an enchantment spell you have
just cast is still affected for 1 round if the spell has a
duration greater than 1 round.

**Irresistible Demand (Sp)**: At 8th level, you can force others
to do your bidding. As a standard action, you attempt to dominate
a creature as though using the *[Dominate Monster]* spell, except
that the creature must have a number of Hit Dice equal to or less
than your wizard level. The targeted creature receives a Will
saving throw each round to negate the effect. The DC is equal to
10 + 1/2 your wizard level + your Intelligence modifier. You can
dominate creatures for a number of rounds per day equal to your
wizard level. These rounds do not need to be consecutive. You
must concentrate as a standard action to maintain control over a
dominated creature.

#### Counterspell School

**Associated School**: Abjuration.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
protective ward power and the energy absorption power of the
abjuration school.

**Disruption (Su)**: At 1st level, you gain the ability to
disrupt spellcasting with a touch. As a melee touch attack, you
can place a disruptive field around the target. While the field
is in place, the target must make a concentration check to cast
any spell or to use a spell-like ability in addition to any other
required concentration checks. The DC of this check is equal to
15 + twice the spell's level.  If the check is failed, the
target's spell is wasted. This field lasts for a number of rounds
equal to 1/2 your wizard level (minimum 1). You can use this
ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence
modifier.

**Counterspell Mastery (Su)**: At 6th level, you gain [Improved
Counterspell] as a bonus feat.  You may attempt to counterspell
an opponent's spell once per day as an immediate action (instead
of a readied action). You must use a spell at least one level
higher than the spell being countered to use this ability. You
can use this ability once per day at 6th level, plus one
additional time per day for every 4 levels beyond 6th.

#### Creation School

**Associated School**: Conjuration.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
acid dart power and the dimensional steps power of the
conjuration school.

**Create Gear (Su)**: At 1st level, you can create any object
that weighs no more than 1 pound per wizard level you
possess. Creating an object in this way is a standard action. The
item remains for 1 minute before fading away, although it
disappears after one round if it leaves your possession. Creating
an item to an exact specification might require a [Craft] skill
check, subject to GM discretion. The object must be made of
simple materials, such as wood, stone, glass, or metal, and
cannot contain any moving parts. You could use this ability to
create a dagger, but not a vial of alchemist's fire. You can use
this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your
Intelligence modifier.

**Creator's Will (Sp)**: At 8th level, you can cast *[Minor
Creation]* as a spell-like ability. You can have no more than one
*[Minor Creation]* active at a time. If you cast the spell again,
the previous casting immediately ends. At 12th level, this
ability improves to *[Major Creation]*. You can use this ability
a number of times per day equal to 1/2 your wizard level.

#### Enhancement School

**Associated School**: Transmutation.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
telekinetic fist and change shape powers of the transmutation
school.

**Augment (Sp)**: As a standard action, you can touch a creature
and grant it either a +2 enhancement bonus to a single ability
score of your choice or a +1 bonus to natural armor that stacks
with any natural armor the creature might possess. At 10th level,
the enhancement bonus to one ability score increases to +4. The
natural armor bonus increases by +1 for every five wizard levels
you possess, to a maximum of +5 at 20th level. This augmentation
lasts a number of rounds equal to 1/2 your wizard level (minimum
1 round). You can use this ability a number of times per day
equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

**Perfection of Self (Su)**: At 8th level, as a swift action you
can grant yourself an enhancement bonus to a single ability score
equal to 1/2 your wizard level (maximum +10) for one round. You
may use this ability for a number of times per day equal to your
wizard level.

#### Foresight School

**Associated School**: Divination.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
diviner's fortune and scrying adept powers of the divination
school.

**Prescience (Su)**: At the beginning of your turn, you may, as a
free action, roll a single d20. At any point before your next
turn, you may use the result of this roll as the result of any
d20 roll you are required to make. If you do not use the d20
result before your next turn, it is lost. You can use this
ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence
modifier.

**Foretell (Su)**: At 8th level, you can utter a prediction of
the immediate future. While your foretelling is in effect, you
emit a 30-foot aura of fortune that aids your allies or hinders
your enemies, as chosen by you at the time of prediction. If you
choose to aid, you and your allies gain a +2 luck bonus on
ability checks, attack rolls, caster level checks, saving throws,
and skill checks. If you choose to hinder, your enemies take a -2
penalty on those rolls instead. You can use this ability for a
number of rounds per day equal to your wizard level. These rounds
do not need to be consecutive.

#### Generation School

**Associated School**: Evocation.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
intense spells and force missile powers of the evocation school.

**Lingering Evocations (Su)**: Any evocation spell you cast with
a duration greater than instantaneous lasts an additional number
of rounds equal to 1/2 your wizard level (minimum +1). At 20th
level, any dispel checks made against your evocation spells must
be rolled twice, and your opponent must use the less favorable
result.

**Wind Servant (Sp)**: As a standard action, you can generate a
blast of air that hurls an unattended object (or objects) or an
object in your possession up to 30 feet in a straight line. If
you have a free hand, you can catch an object hurled toward
yourself. You can move objects weighing up to 1 pound per wizard
level. Objects are not thrown with enough force to cause damage,
although fragile objects like alchemical weapons shatter on
contact with a creature or hard surface. To hit a creature with
an object, you must succeed at a ranged touch attack. You can use
this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your
Intelligence modifier.

#### Life School

**Associated School**: Necromancy.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
power over undead and grave touch powers of the necromancy
school.

**Healing Grace (Su)**: Whenever you cast a spell that has
targets, affects creatures in an area, or requires an attack
roll, you may heal creatures affected by the spell a total of 1
point of damage per level of the spell. This healing may be
spread out between the targets of the spell in any way you
choose. If you assign any of the healing to an undead creature,
it instead takes 1 point of damage for each point assigned. At
11th level, the amount of damage cured increases to 2 points of
damage per level of the spell. This healing occurs when the spell
is cast and has no effect on creatures that enter its area after
the spell is in place. At 20th level, the amount of damage cured
increases to 3 points of damage per level of the spell.

**Share Essence (Sp)**: As a standard action, you can share your
vital energy with a living creature that you touch. You take 1d6
points of nonlethal damage + 1 for every two wizard levels you
possess. You cannot take an amount of nonlethal damage equal to
or greater than your current hit point total; any excess is
prevented. The recipient gains a number of temporary hit points
equal to the amount of damage you received (prevented damage is
not counted). These temporary hit points disappear 1 hour
later. You may not use this ability to grant yourself temporary
hit points. You can use this ability a number of times per day
equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier. This ability has no
effect if you are immune to nonlethal damage.

#### Manipulator School

**Associated School**: Enchantment.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
dazing touch and aura of despair powers of the enchantment
school.

**Beguiling Touch (Sp)**: You can charm a living creature by
touching it. Creatures with more Hit Dice than your wizard level
are unaffected, as are creatures in combat and those with an
attitude of hostile toward you. Creatures receive a Will saving
throw to negate the effect. The DC of this save is equal to 10 +
1/2 your wizard level + your Intelligence modifier. Creatures
that fail their save are affected by *[Charm Monster]* for a
number of rounds equal to 1/2 your wizard level (minimum 1). This
is a mind-affecting effect. You can use this ability a number of
times per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

**Shape Emotions (Su)**: At 8th level, you can emit a 30-foot
aura to either ward off or welcome emotional influence for a
number of rounds per day equal to your wizard level. If you
choose to ward, you and your allies within this aura receive a +4
morale bonus on saves against mind-affecting spells and effects,
and any fear effects targeting you or your allies are reduced by
one step (shaken has no effect, frightened becomes shaken, and
panicked becomes frightened). If you chose to enhance emotional
influence, enemies within the aura receive a -2 penalty on saves
against mind-affecting spells and effects. These rounds do not
need to be consecutive.

#### Phantasm School

**Associated School**: Illusion.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
blinding ray and invisibility field powers of the illusion
school.

**Terror (Su)**: As a standard action, you can make a melee touch
attack that causes a creature to be assailed by nightmares only
it can see. The creature provokes an attack of opportunity from
you or an ally of your choice. Creatures with more Hit Dice than
your wizard level are unaffected. This is a mind-affecting fear
effect. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal
to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

**Bedeviling Aura (Su)**: At 8th level, you can emit a 30-foot
aura that bedevils your enemies with phantasmal
assailants. Enemies within this aura move at half speed, are
unable to take attacks of opportunity, and are considered to be
flanked. This is a mind-affecting effect. You can use this
ability for a number of rounds per day equal to your wizard
level. These rounds do not need to be consecutive.

#### Scryer School

**Associated School**: Divination.

**Replacement Power**: The following school power replaces the
diviner's fortune power of the divination school.

**Send Senses (Sp)**: As a standard action, you place a scrying
sensor at a point within medium range (100 feet + 10 feet/wizard
level) that you can see and have line of effect to. You can see
or hear (not both) through this sensor for number of rounds equal
to 1/2 your wizard level (minimum 1). The sensor otherwise
functions as a *clairaudience/clairovoyance* spell with a caster
level equal to your wizard level. You can use this ability a
number of times per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

#### Shadow School

**Associated School**: Illusion.

**Replacement Powers**: The following school powers replace the
blinding ray and invisibility field powers of the illusion
school.

**Binding Darkness (Sp)**: As a standard action, you cast a weave
of shadows at any foe within 30 feet as a ranged touch
attack. The shadows entangle your foe for 1 round plus 1
additional round for every five wizard levels you possess. In
conditions of bright light, this duration is halved (minimum 1
round). A creature entangled by your shadows has concealment from
those without darkvision or the ability to see in darkness, and
other creatures likewise have concealment relative to it.  You
can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your
Intelligence modifier.

**Shadow Step (Sp)**: At 8th level, you can use this ability to
walk through the Shadow Plane and reappear as a standard
action. You can travel up to 30 feet per wizard level per day in
this fashion, either in a single round or broken up across
multiple shadow steps. This movement must be used in 5-foot
increments and does not provoke an attack of opportunity. Travel
through the Shadow Plane is imprecise; when you arrive, you
re-enter 1 square off target, as per the rules for thrown [Splash
Weapons]. If this would place you in an occupied square, you
instead arrive in the nearest safe location. When you arrive, you
are cloaked in shadow and gain concealment as the *[Blur]* spell
for 1 round. You may bring other willing creatures with you, but
you must expend an equal amount of distance for each additional
creature brought with you. They likewise re-enter off target
(roll location for each creature) and are cloaked in shadow for 1
round.

#### Shapechange School

**Associated School**: Transmutation.

**Replacement Power**: The following school power replaces the
telekinetic fist power of the transmutation school.

**Battleshaping (Su)**: As a swift action, you grow a single
natural weapon. The natural weapon lasts for 1 round and has a +1
enhancement bonus on attack and damage rolls for every four
wizard levels you possess. You can grow a claw, a bite, or a gore
attack. These attacks deal the normal damage for a creature of
your size. At 11th level, you can shape two natural weapons. You
may not grow additional limbs or a tail with this ability. You
can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your
Intelligence modifier.

#### Teleportation School

**Associated School**: Conjuration.

**Replacement Power**: The following school power replaces the
acid dart power of the conjuration school.

**Shift (Su)**: At 1st level, you can teleport to a nearby space
as a swift action as if using *[Dimension Door]*. This movement
does not provoke an attack of opportunity. You must be able to
see the space that you are moving into. You cannot take other
creatures with you when you use this ability (except for
familiars). You can move 5 feet for every two wizard levels you
possess (minimum 5 feet). You can use this ability a number of
times per day equal to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.

#### Undead School

**Associated School**: Necromancy.

**Replacement Power**: The following school power replaces the
grave touch power of the necromancy school.

**Bolster (Sp)**: As a standard action, you can touch an undead
creature and infuse it with negative energy. It gains a +1
profane bonus on all attack rolls and saving throws, as well as 1
temporary hit point per Hit Die and a +2 bonus to its turn
resistance. The bonus on attack rolls and saving throws increases
by +1 for every 5 wizard levels you possess.  These bonuses last
for a number of rounds equal to 1/2 your wizard level (minimum 1
round). The bonuses and temporary hit points are immediately
dispelled if the creature is within the area of a *[Consecrate]*
spell. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal
to 3 + your Intelligence modifier.
