# Creating NPCs

The world that the player characters inhabit should be full of
rich and vibrant characters with whom they can interact. While
most need little more than names and general descriptions, some
require complete statistics, such as town guards, local clerics,
and wizened sages. The PCs might find themselves in combat with
these characters, either against them or as allies. Alternatively
the PCs might find themselves relying on the skills and abilities
of the NPCs. In either case, the process for creating these NPCs
can be performed in seven simple steps.

## Step 1: The Basics

The first step in making an NPC is to determine its basic role in
your campaign. This includes its race, class, and basic concept.

## Step 2: Determine Ability Scores

Once the character's basic concept has been determined, its
ability scores must be assigned. Apply the NPC's racial modifiers
after the scores have been assigned. For every four levels the
NPC has attained, increase one of its scores by 1. If the NPC
possesses levels in a PC class, it is considered a heroic NPC and
receives better ability scores. These scores can be assigned in
any order.

**Basic NPCs**: The ability scores for a basic NPC are: 13, 12,
11, 10, 9, and 8.

**Heroic NPCs**: The ability scores for a heroic NPC are: 15, 14,
13, 12, 10, and 8.

**Preset Ability Scores**: Instead of assigning the scores, you
can use Table: NPC Ability Scores to determine the NPC's ability
scores, adjusting them as necessary to fit. Use the Melee NPC
ability scores for characters whose primary role involves melee
combat, such as barbarians, fighters, monks, paladins, rangers,
and warriors. The Ranged NPC ability scores are for characters
that fight with ranged weapons or use their [Dexterity] to hit,
such as fighters, rangers, and rogues. Use the Divine NPC ability
scores for characters with divine spellcasting capabilities, such
as adepts, clerics, and druids. The Arcane NPC ability scores
should be used by characters with arcane spellcasting
capabilities, such as bards, sorcerers, and wizards. Finally, the
Skill NPC ability scores should be used for characters that focus
on skill use, such as aristocrats, bards, commoners, experts, and
rogues. Some NPCs might not fit into one of these categories and
should have custom ability scores.

Table: NPC Ability Scores

Ability Score

Melee NPC

Ranged NPC

Divine NPC

Arcane NPC

Skill NPC

Basic

Heroic

Basic

Heroic

Basic

Heroic

Basic

Heroic

Basic

Heroic

Strength

13

15

11

13

10

12

8

8

10

12

Dexterity

11

13

13

15

8

8

12

14

12

14

Constitution

12

14

12

14

12

14

10

12

11

13

Intelligence

9

10

10

12

9

10

13\*

15\*

13

15

Wisdom

10

12

9

10

13

15

9

10

8

8

Charisma

8

8

8

8

11

13

11\*

13\*

9

10

\* If the arcane caster's spellcasting relies on Charisma,
exchange these scores with one another.

Table: Racial Ability Adjustments

Ability Score

Dwarf

Elf

Gnome

Half-Elf\*

Half-Orc\*

Halfling

Human\*

Strength

—

—

–2

—

—

–2

—

Dexterity

—

+2

—

—

—

+2

—

Constitution

+2

–2

+2

—

—

—

—

Intelligence

—

+2

—

—

—

+2

—

Wisdom

+2

—

—

—

—

—

—

Charisma

–2

—

+2

—

—

—

—

\* Half-elves, half-orcs, and humans receive a +2 bonus to one
ability score of your choice.

## Step 3: Skills

To assign skills precisely, total up the number of skill ranks
possessed by the character and assign them normally. Remember
that the number of ranks in an individual skill that a character
can possess is limited by his total HD.

For simpler skill generation, refer to Table: NPC Skill
Selections to determine the total number of skill selections the
NPC possesses. After selecting that number of skills, mostly from
the class skills lists of the NPC's class, the NPC receives a
number of ranks in each skill equal to his level.

If the NPC has two classes, start by selecting skills for the
class with the fewest number of skill selections. The NPC
receives a number of ranks in those skills equal to his total
character level. Next, find the difference in the number of
selections between the first class and the other class possessed
by the NPC. Select that number of new skills and give the NPC a
number of ranks in those skills equal to his level in the second
class. For example, a human fighter 3/monk 4 with a +1
[Intelligence] modifier can select four skills for his fighter
class (since it receives fewer selections). These four skills
each have seven ranks (equal to his total level). Next, he
selects a number of skills equal to the difference between the
fighter and the monk classes, in this case two skills. These two
skills each have four ranks (his monk level).

If the NPC has three or more classes, you must use the precise
method for determining his skills.

Once all of the NPC's ranks have been determined, assign class
skill bonuses and apply the bonus or penalty from the NPC's
relevant ability score.

Table: NPC Skill Selections

PC Skill Class Selections\*

NPC Skill Class Selections\*

Barbarian

4 + Int Mod

Adept

2 + Int Mod

Bard

6 + Int Mod

Aristocrat

4 + Int Mod

Cleric

2 + Int Mod

Commoner

2 + Int Mod

Druid

4 + Int Mod

Expert

6 + Int Mod

Fighter

2 + Int Mod

Warrior

2 + Int Mod

Monk

4 + Int Mod

Paladin

2 + Int Mod

Ranger

6 + Int Mod

Rogue

8 + Int Mod

Sorcerer

2 + Int Mod

Wizard

2 + Int Mod

\* Humans receive one additional skill selection.

## Step 4: Feats

After skills have been determined, the next step is to assign the
NPC's feats. Start by assigning all of the feats granted through
class abilities. Next, assign the feats garnered from the NPC's
total character level (one feat for every two levels beyond 1st).
Remember that humans receive an additional feat at 1st level. For
simplified feat choices, select feats from the lists provided for
the following character types.

**Arcane Caster**: [Arcane Strike], [Combat Casting], [Eschew
Materials], [Greater Spell Focus], [Greater Spell Penetration],
[Improved Initiative], [Iron Will], [item creation feats] (all),
[Lightning Reflexes], [metamagic feats] (all), [Spell Focus],
[Spell Mastery], [Spell Penetration], and [Toughness].

**Divine Caster (With Channeling)**: [Alignment Channel],
[Channel Smite], [Combat Casting], [Command Undead], [Elemental
Channel], [Extra Channel], [Improved Initiative], [Improved
Channel], [Iron Will], [item creation feats] (all), [metamagic
feats] (all), [Power Attack], [Selective Channeling], [Spell
Focus], [Spell Penetration], [Toughness], and [Turn Undead].

**Divine Caster** **(Without Channeling)**: [Cleave], [Combat
Casting], [Eschew Materials], [Improved Initiative], [Iron Will],
[item creation feats] (all), [Lightning Reflexes], [metamagic
feats] (all), [Natural Spell], [Power Attack], [Spell Focus],
[Spell Penetration], [Toughness], and [Weapon Focus].

**Melee (Finesse Fighter)**: [Combat Expertise], [Combat
Reflexes], [Dazzling Display], [Deadly Stroke], [Dodge], [Greater
Vital Strike], [Improved Disarm], [Improved Feint], [Improved
Trip], [Improved Vital Strike], [Mobility], [Spring Attack],
[Shatter Defenses], [Vital Strike], [Weapon Finesse], and
[Whirlwind Attack].

**Melee (Unarmed Fighter)**: [Combat Reflexes], [Deflect Arrows],
[Dodge], [Gorgon's Fist], [Improved Grapple], [Improved
Initiative], [Improved Unarmed Strike], [Medusa's Wrath],
[Mobility], [Scorpion Style], [Snatch Arrows], [Spring Attack],
[Stunning Fist], and [Weapon Focus].

**Melee (Mounted)**: [Improved Critical], [Improved Initiative],
[Mounted Combat], [Power Attack], [Ride-By Attack], [Skill Focus]
(Ride), [Spirited Charge], [Toughness], [Trample], and [Weapon
Focus].

**Melee (Sword and Shield Fighter)**: [Cleave], [Great Cleave],
[Great Fortitude], [Greater Vital Strike], [Improved Bull Rush],
[Improved Critical], [Improved Initiative], [Improved Vital
Strike], [Power Attack], [Shield Focus], [Shield Master], [Shield
Slam], [Two-Weapon Fighting], [Vital Strike], and [Weapon Focus].

**Melee , [Great Cleave], [Great Fortitude], [Greater Vital
Strike], [Improved Bull Rush], [Improved Critical], [Improved
Initiative], [Improved Sunder], [Improved Vital Strike], [Power
Attack], [Vital Strike], and [Weapon Focus].

**Melee (Two-Weapon Fighter)**: [Combat Reflexes], [Dodge],
[Double Slice], [Greater Two-Weapon Fighting], [Greater Vital
Strike], [Improved Critical], [Improved Initiative], [Improved
Two-Weapon Fighting], [Improved Vital Strike], [Two-Weapon
Defense], [Two-Weapon Fighting], [Two-Weapon Rend], [Vital
Strike], and [Weapon Focus].

**Ranged**: [Deadly Aim], [Far Shot], [Greater Vital Strike],
[Improved Initiative], [Improved Vital Strike], [Manyshot],
[Pinpoint Targeting], [Point Blank Shot], [Precise Shot], [Rapid
Reload], [Rapid Shot], [Shot on the Run], [Vital Strike], and
[Weapon Focus].

**Skill (most NPC classes)**: [Armor Proficiency] (all), [Great
Fortitude], [Improved Initiative], [Iron Will], [Lightning
Reflexes], [Martial Weapon Proficiency], [Run], [Shield
Proficiency], [Skill Focus], and [Toughness].

## Step 5: Class Features

After determining feats, the next step is to fill in all the
class features possessed by the NPC. This is the time to make
decisions about the NPC's spell selection, rage powers, rogue
talents, and other class-based abilities.

When it comes to spells, determine how many spell selections you
need to make for each level. Choose a variety of spells for the
highest two levels of spells possessed by the NPC. For all other
levels, stick to a few basic spells, prepared multiple times (if
possible). If this NPC is slated to appear in only one encounter
(such as a combat), leaving off lower-level spells entirely is an
acceptable way to speed up generation, especially if the NPC is
unlikely to cast those spells. You can always choose a few during
play if they are needed.

## Step 6: Gear

After recording all of the NPC's class features, the next step is
to outfit the character with gear appropriate to his level. Note
that NPCs receive less gear than PCs of an equal level. If an NPC
is a recurring character, his gear should be selected carefully.
Use the total gp value found on Table: NPC Gear to determine how
much gear he should carry. NPCs that are only scheduled to appear
once can have a simpler gear selection. Table: NPC Gear includes
a number of categories to make it easier to select an NPC's gear.
When outfitting the character, spend the listed amount on each
category by purchasing as few items as possible. Leftover gold
from any category can be spent on any other category. Funds left
over at the end represent coins and jewelry carried by the
character.

Note that these values are approximate and based on the values
for a campaign using the medium experience progression and a
normal treasure allotment. If your campaign is using the fast
experience progression, treat your NPCs as one level higher when
determining their gear. If your campaign is using the slow
experience progression, treat the NPCs as one level lower when
determining their gear. If your campaign is high fantasy, double
these values. Reduce them by half if your campaign is low
fantasy. If the final value of an NPC's gear is a little over or
under these amounts, that's okay.

  Basic Level   Heroic Level   Total gp Value   Weapons     Protection   Magic       Limited Use   Gear
  ------------- -------------- ---------------- ----------- ------------ ----------- ------------- ----------
  1             —              260 gp           50 gp       130 gp       —           40 gp         40 gp
  2             1              390 gp           100 gp      150 gp       —           40 gp         100 gp
  3             2              780 gp           350 gp      200 gp       —           80 gp         150 gp
  4             3              1,650 gp         650 gp      800 gp       —           100 gp        200 gp
  5             4              2,400 gp         900 gp      1,000 gp     —           300 gp        200 gp
  6             5              3,450 gp         1,400 gp    1,400 gp     —           450 gp        200 gp
  7             6              4,650 gp         2,350 gp    1,650 gp     —           450 gp        200 gp
  8             7              6,000 gp         2,700 gp    2,000 gp     500 gp      600 gp        200 gp
  9             8              7,800 gp         3,000 gp    2,500 gp     1,000 gp    800 gp        500 gp
  10            9              10,050 gp        3,500 gp    3,000 gp     2,000 gp    1,050 gp      500 gp
  11            10             12,750 gp        4,000 gp    4,000 gp     3,000 gp    1,250 gp      500 gp
  12            11             16,350 gp        6,000 gp    4,500 gp     4,000 gp    1,350 gp      500 gp
  13            12             21,000 gp        8,500 gp    5,500 gp     5,000 gp    1,500 gp      500 gp
  14            13             27,000 gp        9,000 gp    8,000 gp     7,000 gp    2,500 gp      500 gp
  15            14             34,800 gp        12,000 gp   10,500 gp    9,000 gp    2,800 gp      500 gp
  16            15             45,000 gp        17,000 gp   13,500 gp    11,000 gp   3,000 gp      500 gp
  17            16             58,500 gp        19,000 gp   18,000 gp    16,000 gp   4,000 gp      1,500 gp
  18            17             75,000 gp        24,000 gp   23,000 gp    20,000 gp   6,500 gp      1,500 gp
  19            18             96,000 gp        30,000 gp   28,000 gp    28,000 gp   8,000 gp      2,000 gp
  20            19             123,000 gp       40,000 gp   35,000 gp    35,000 gp   11,000 gp     2,000 gp
  —             20             159,000 gp       55,000 gp   40,000 gp    44,000 gp   18,000 gp     2,000 gp

  : Table: NPC Gear

**Weapons**: This includes normal, masterwork, and magic weapons,
as well as magic staves and wands used by spellcasters to harm
their enemies. For example, a *wand of scorching ray* would count
as a weapon, but a *staff of life* would count as a piece of
magic gear.

**Protection**: This category includes armor and shields, as well
as any magic item that augments a character's [Armor Class] or
saving throws.

**Magic**: This category includes all other permanent magic
items. Most rings, rods, and wondrous items fit into this
category.

**Limited Use**: Items that fall into this category include
alchemical items, potions, scrolls, and wands with few charges.
Charged wondrous items fall into this grouping as well.

**Gear**: Use the amount in this category to purchase standard
nonmagical gear for the character. In most cases, this equipment
can be omitted during creation and filled in as needed during
play. You can assume that the character has whatever gear is
needed for him to properly use his skills and class abilities.
This category can also include jewelry, gems, or loose coins that
the NPC might have on his person.

## Step 7: Details

Once you have assigned all of the NPC's gear, all that remains is
to fill out the details. Determine the character's attack and
damage bonuses, CMB, CMD, initiative modifier, and [Armor
Class]. If the character's magic items affect his skills or
ability scores, make sure to take those changes into
account. Determine the character's total hit points by assuming
the average result. Finally, fill out any other important
details, such as name, alignment, religion, and a few personality
traits to round him out.
