Prestige classes allow characters to become truly exceptional,
gaining powers beyond the ken of their peers. Unlike the core
classes*,*characters must meet specific requirements before they
can take their first level of a prestige class. If a character
does not meet the requirements for a prestige class before
gaining any benefits of that level, that character cannot take
that prestige class. Characters that take levels in prestige
classes do not gain any favored class bonuses for those levels.

**[Arcane Archer]**: An arcane spellcaster who draws upon ancient
elven traditions to infuse his arrows with potent magical power.

**[Arcane Trickster]**: A troublemaker and a scoundrel who uses
arcane magic to enhance her thievery and trickery.

**[Assassin]**: A remorseless murderer who kills for money and
the sheer thrill of death-dealing.

**[Dragon Disciple]**: An arcane spellcaster who has embraced his
latent draconic heritage and, over the course of training and
devotion, undergoes a partial transformation into a dragon.

**[Duelist]**: A swashbuckling swordfighter who relies upon
grace, poise, and acrobatics to win the day.

**[Eldritch Knight]**: An arcane spellcaster who augments his
magical skills with combat to create a deadly combination of
weapons and magic.

**[Loremaster]**: A spellcaster who devotes his life to research
and rumination upon the mysteries of the world.

**[Mystic Theurge]**: Equally devoted to divine and arcane magic,
the mystic theurge combines both magical traditions into one
incredibly diverse class.

**[PF Chronicler]**: An explorer at heart, the PF chronicler
travels to distant, exotic lands to expand her knowledge of the
world.

**[Shadowdancer]**: A mysterious adventurer who walks the
boundaries between the real world and the realm of shadows, and
who can command shadows to do her bidding.

## Definitions of Terms

Here are definitions of some terms used in this section.

**Core Class**: One of the standard eleven classes found in
  [Classes].

**Caster Level**: Generally equal to the number of class levels
(see below) in a spellcasting class. Some prestige classes add
caster levels to an existing class.

**Character Level**: The total level of the character, which is
the sum of all class levels held by that character.

**Class Level**: The level of a character in a particular class.
For a character with levels in only one class, class level and
character level are the same.
