## Variant Rules

Presented in this section are several optional rules variants for
combat that may be swapped out with the existing rules. As these
options significantly revise how the game works, players and GMs
should be extremely careful when deciding whether or not to
incorporate these optional rules into an existing campaign, and
should be prepared for an additional layer of complexity and
potential slowdowns in gameplay as everyone at the table works on
getting up to speed.

### [Armor as Damage Reduction]

For years, gamers have debated what exactly the approximation
known as Armor Class represents—whether it's how difficult a
given character is to hit, how much physical punishment he can
take, and so on. This alternate system presents a way to view
armor more like damage reduction—not as something that makes a
character hard to hit, but as protection that makes him harder to
damage, as the armor soaks up most of the punishment and negates
it before it can impact the wearer.

### [Called Shots]

The normal combat rules for the PF RPG deal with attacks and hits
in an abstract way, subtracting hit points and leaving the
details of where the sword strikes up to the GM's description.
This system places more control in the individual's hands,
allowing characters to target specific areas of an opponent, with
corresponding results.

### [Piecemeal Armor]

Sometimes armor doesn't come in nicely matched sets, purchased
straight from the armorer. Warriors may be forced to make do with
tattered, hand-me-down sets cobbled together from various pieces,
or else taken from the dead and defeated on the field of battle.
Perhaps your character is a castaway forced to scavenge for what
bits of armor she can find, or a resident of a post-apocalyptic
setting in which everyone must scrounge through junk heaps and
burned-out storefronts to acquire their equipment. Though such
patchwork suits are almost always less effective than complete
suits with pieces made to work together, the rules in this
section provide everything you need to know about mixing and
matching armor types.

### [Wounds and Vigor]

Just as Armor Class is an abstraction, so are hit points—after
all, just because a dagger does 1d4 points of damage doesn't mean
a high-level fighter is somehow immune to having his throat slit.
This alternate system attempts to better represent the
differences between injuries and impeded performance.

Armor as Damage Reduction

## Armor as Damage Reduction 

While the armor and Armor Class system presented in the PF
Roleplaying Game is tried and tested, some players may yet have a
sense that it feels slightly off. That is to say, if a suit of
armor is actually protecting the wearer from attacks that strike
but simply fail to cause the wearer harm, why then do we say that
armor reduces the chance of a hit? The abstraction has been
clarified in the rules by defining what it means to be “hit” in
combat as actually being “hit in such a way as to effectively
cause harm,” but this explanation is still not enough for some
players.

The following is an alternative system that allows armor to
absorb the damage of attacks, rather than a system that provides
an abstract way of determining when a hit does actual harm. Like
all the rules presented in this chapter, it is a variant to the
base system of the PF RPG. It is for GMs who want armor to reduce
damage rather than increase Armor Class, and replaces the normal
rules for armor.

In this system, a creatures no longer has an Armor Class. Instead
it has a Defense score that a foe's attack roll must meet or
exceed to hit the creature. Then any damage is reduced by damage
reduction based on the creature's armor worn and any natural
armor bonus the creature has. Furthermore, armor has a chance of
reducing all critical hits to normal hits, by replacing the
confirmation roll for critical hits with a critical defense check
made by the creature threatened by the critical hit.

### Defense

In this alternative system, a creature does not have an Armor
Class (AC); it instead has a Defense score. Defense is similar to
touch AC in the standard PF Roleplaying Game rules, but it also
adds the shield bonus (including any enhancement bonus to the
shield), and any enhancement bonus to armor.

**Defense = 10 + shield bonus + Dexterity modifier + other
modifiers (including armor's enhancement bonus, but not armor
bonus or natural armor bonus)**

Defense represents how easy or difficult it is to hit a creature.
The shield bonus is added because a creature is considered to be
actively blocking attacks with its shield whenever it can, which
is whenever it would gain its Dexterity bonus to AC and not be
flat-footed.

**Losing Dexterity Bonus to Defense**: Situations or effects that
would cause you to lose your Dexterity bonus to AC instead cause
you to lose your Dexterity bonus to Defense. Also, whenever you
lose your Dexterity bonus to Defense, you also lose any shield
bonus to Defense, since when you lose your Dexterity bonus to AC,
you also lose the ability to properly respond to attacks with
your shield.

**Flat-Footed Defense**: You do not gain your Dexterity or shield
bonus to your Defense if you are flat-footed or lose your
Dexterity bonus to Defense; thus, your Flat-Footed Defense is
equal to your Defense minus your Dexterity bonus and shield
bonus.

**Defense and Using a Shield without Proficiency**: When a
creature uses a shield it is not proficient with, it takes that
shield's armor check penalty as a penalty to the shield bonus,
along with the other penalties for using a shield without
proficiency. Furthermore, it also takes this penalty to its
Flat-Footed Defense, as the shield actually gets in the way
instead of defending against incoming attacks.

### Armor as Damage Reduction 

Armor in this system keeps all of its normal statistics and
qualities, but its armor bonus (including any enhancement bonus
added to armor bonus and natural armor bonus) is converted to
DR/armor. The DR an armor provides is equal to its total armor
bonus with a +1 bonus at 5th level or at 5 Hit Dice, with an
increase to that bonus of +1 for every five levels above 5th
level, or every 5 Hit Dice over 5 Hit Dice (to a maximum of +4 to
DR at 20th level or at 20 or more Hit Dice), provided that the
creature wearing the armor is also proficient with the armor.

**Using Armor without Proficiency**: Creatures using armor they
are not proficient with do not gain the bonus per level or Hit
Dice to the DR, on top of any of the other normal penalties for
using armor without proficiency.

**DR/Armor**: This type of DR blocks the damage of all attacks
that would normally be affected by DR, based on the composition
of the armor (see Table 5–1). Unlike most forms of damage
reduction, DR/armor stacks with other types of DR. For instances,
when fighting a skeleton with DR 5/bludgeoning and DR 4/armor (+2
for armor, +2 for natural armor), the skeleton's DR/armor reduces
9 points of damage from non-bludgeoning attacks, and 4 damage
from bludgeoning weapon attacks. Magic weapons and attacks from
Large or larger creatures bypass the DR 4/armor, but not the DR
5/bludgeoning.

**Natural Armor Bonus and DR**: Like a creature's armor bonus, a
natural armor bonus is also converted into damage reduction. If a
creature is wearing armor and has a natural armor bonus, the
creature adds its armor bonus to its natural armor bonus to
determine the amount of DR/armor that it has (see Table 5–2).

For instance, if a creature wearing a *+2 chain shirt* has DR
6/armor is then subject to a *[barkskin]*spell cast by a
6th-level druid (gaining a +3 natural armor bonus), its DR
becomes DR 9/armor for the duration of the spell. This DR is
bypassed by adamantine, or the attacks of Huge or larger
creatures.

A creature that has both DR from a source other than armor and a
natural armor bonus gains the effects of an enhanced form of DR,
similar to how the composition of the armor grants special
DR/armor defenses (see Table 5–1). If a creature has magical
armor, natural armor, and DR, it takes the best form of the
special protection provided by both its armor and its mix of DR
and natural armor to its DR/armor.

For instance, if a creature has natural armor and DR/magic and is
wearing adamantine armor, that creature's DR/armor functions as
DR/—, and can be bypassed by Gargantuan or larger creatures,
since the adamantine armor provides the best of the two damage
reductions.

**Unusual Creatures and Armor DR**: Amorphous or incorporeal
creatures have an easier time bypassing DR/armor. When they
attack a creature with DR/armor, they typically treat that DR as
a fraction of the DR/armor. Attacks by incorporeal creatures
entirely ignore the DR unless that DR comes from a force effect
or from armor with the *[ghost touch]* special armor
quality. These traits are detailed in Table 5–3.

## Critical Hits and Defense

In this alternative system, when a creature threatens a critical
hit, it does not make a critical hit confirmation roll. Instead,
the target of that critical hit makes a critical defense check
instead. A critical defense check is 1d20 + a bonus equal to the
creature's DR + the creature's Dexterity modifier (up to the
maximum Dexterity bonus allowed by any armor worn) + the sum of
any deflection and shield bonus to Defense.

**Critical defense check bonus = creature's DR + Dexterity
modifier + shield bonus to Defense + deflection bonus**

The DC of the check is based on the die roll for the critical
threat. It is further modified by the base attack bonus of the
attacking creature, how many critical feats the attacking
creature has (if any; 10 maximum), and a bonus relationship
between the size of the attacking creature and the target of the
critical hit, if the attacking creature is larger than the
creature it attacked.

**Critical defense DC = critical hit roll + 1/2 attacker's base
attack bonus + 1 for each critical feat + 1 for each size
category larger attacker is than target**

For instance, if a Medium creature is hit with a crossbow fired
by a Medium 6th-level fighter with two critical feats, and the
critical threat attack roll is a 19, the target of the potential
critical hit makes a critical defense check with a DC of 24 to
reduce the critical hit to a normal hit. If the target is wearing
*+1 leather armor*, has a Dexterity of 18, and is using a *+1
buckler*, that target would have a +9 bonus on the critical
defense check to reduce the critical hit to a normal hit. On a
roll of 15 or higher, the critical hit is reduced to a normal
hit, and the target takes normal damage for the hit (which is
reduced by its DR). If the creature firing the crossbow had
rolled a 20, the target of the critical hit would need to roll a
16 or higher on its critical defense check to reduce the impact
of the critical hit, making it a normal hit.

On a failed critical defense check, the target of the critical
hit takes the damage for the critical hit. That damage is still
reduced by the target of the critical hit's DR.

**Fortification Special Armor Quality**: The [fortification]
special armor quality acts in concert with the check, coming
into play if the armor check fails.

Table: Armor Composition and DR

+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|Material            |Dr Provided         |Attacker Size to    |
|                    |                    |Bypass DR           |
+====================+====================+====================+
|Nonmagical armor^1^ |DR/magic            |Large               |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|Magical armor^1^    |DR/adamantine       |Huge                |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|Adamantine armor^1^ |DR/—                |Gargantuan          |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

^1^ Brilliant energy weapons bypass any DR provided by armor. In
addition, DR from armor is halved if a creature is grappled or
entangled, and does not apply when a creature is helpless or
pinned.


Table: Natural Armor Conversion to DR

+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|Natural Armor/DR    |DR Provided         |Attacker Size to    |
|                    |                    |Bypass DR           |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|Natural armor with  |DR/adamantine       |Huge DR/magic       |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|Natural armor with  |DR/—                |Gargantuan          |
|                    |                    |DR/adamantine       |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|Natural armor with  |DR/—^1^             |Colossal            |
|DR/—                |                    |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|Natural armor with  |DR/epic^1^          |n/a                 |
|DR/epic             |                    |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

^1^ A creature that already has DR/— or DR/epic increases its DR
by an amount equal to its natural armor bonus.


Table: Unusual Creatures and Armor DR

+--------------------+--------------------+
|Attacking Creature  |DR Modifier         |
|Type                |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+
|Amorphous^1^        |×1/2                |
+--------------------+--------------------+
|Incorporeal         |×0 (×1 if DR is from|
|                    |a force effect or   |
|                    |*[ghost touch]*     |
|                    |armor)              |
+--------------------+--------------------+
|Swarm of Tiny       |×1/2                |
|creatures           |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+
|Swarm of Diminutive |×1/4                |
|creatures           |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+
|Swarm of Fine       |×0                  |
|creatures           |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+

^1^ Elementals, oozes, oozelike creatures, and any creature with
the amorphous defensive ability.

## Called Shots

The PF Roleplaying Game deals with hits and damage in a rather
abstract way, treating almost all hits the same except for the
amount and type of damage dealt. With these optional called shot
rules, PCs, monsters, and villains alike can aim their attacks
more precisely, potentially to devastating effect.

These rules are an optional addition to any campaign, and should
be approached with care by the Game Master.

### Making Called Shots

A called shot is an attack aimed at a particular part of the
body, in the hope of gaining some extra effect from the attack.
The smaller or better guarded the area, the more difficult the
called shot. A called shot is a single attack made as a
full-round action, and thus can't be combined with a charge,
feats like Vital Strike, or multiple attacks with a full-attack
action.

Called shots are divided into three basic difficulty groups:
easy, tricky, and challenging. Easy called shots represent large
areas of the body, and are made at a –2 penalty. They have
relatively minor effects unless a critical hit is scored or
massive damage is dealt. Tricky called shots represent either
smaller areas, like a hand, or areas a creature protects well,
like its head. Tricky shots receive a –5 penalty, and inflict
more serious consequences. Challenging called shots represent
very small areas like eyes, fingers, or creatures' necks. They
receive a –10 penalty, and successful hits cause significant
short-term impairment. Beyond these challenging ratings lie
almost impossible called shots that receive a –20 penalty. For
called shots against non-humanoid creatures, use common sense and
the categories above as guidelines. For example, a flying
creature's wings are treated as arms.

**Range and Reach**: Called shots work best at close range. Melee
called shots are at a –2 penalty if the target isn't adjacent to
its attacker. For called shots made at range, all range penalties
due to range increment are doubled, with a minimum penalty of –2
for any called shot against a target that's not within 30 feet.

**Critical Hits and Critical Threats**: A called shot has the
normal chance for a critical hit, and inflicts an extra effect if
one is confirmed. The exact effects of a successful critical hit
depend on where the target was hit, and are described under
Called Shot Effects.

### Additional Rules

**Automatic Hits**: Some effects in the game, like *[true
strike]* or the flash of insight ability of cyclopes, provide
automatic or nearly automatic hits. Using such an ability on a
called shot turns it into a normal attack, with none of the
benefits or penalties associated with called shots. From a story
perspective, this is because the effect cannot distinguish
between a hit in general and a hit in a particular area, but it's
also necessary to keep the power of such abilities in line with
their original intended effects. Some Game Masters may prefer a
more theatrical or dangerous game in which magic can make a shot
through the eye nearly certain, in which case this rule can be
ignored.

**Cover**: Cover other than soft cover interferes with a called
shot even more than with a normal shot. Double any AC bonuses
provided by cover that isn't soft cover. In addition, cover may
make certain called shots impossible.

**Concealment**: The miss chance for a called shot against a
creature with concealment increases to 50%. It's not possible to
make a called shot against a creature with total concealment. For
effects that function like concealment, such as
*[blink]*and*[displacement]*, a miss chance of 50% or more
prevents called shots, a miss chance of 20% increases to 50%, and
miss chances of other values are doubled.

**Damage Reduction**: If damage reduction completely negates the
damage from a called shot, the called shot has no effect. If hit
point damage does get through, the called shot has normal
effects. Damage reduction does not reduce any ability damage,
ability drain, penalties, or bleed damage caused by the called
shot.

**Immunity**: Immunity to critical hits protects against the
extra effects of called shots. Partial protection, such as that
provided by the *[fortification]* special ability of some magical
armors, protects the creature as though the called shot were a
critical hit.

**Regeneration**: Regeneration provides no special protection
against called shots, but it might negate or undo some of the
effects, such as bleeding or limb loss.

**Saving Throws**: If a saving throw is allowed on a called shot,
the DC is equal to the Armor Class hit by the attack. In the case
of an attack roll of a natural 20, the DC is the AC the attack
would have hit if 20s did not automatically hit.

**Stacking**: Unless otherwise stated, penalties for multiple
called shots do not stack, even if they are to different areas of
the body. Ability damage and drain caused by called shots always
stacks.

**Touch Attacks**: Touch attacks and ranged touch attacks made as
called shots must target AC rather than touch AC. This represents
the care it takes to target such strikes.

### Called Shot Feats

**Improved Called Shot:** You are skilled at landing blows right
where you want to.

**Prerequisites**: Int 13, [Combat Expertise].

\

**Benefit**: You receive a +2 bonus on attack rolls when making a
called shot. When taking a full-round or standard action that
gives you multiple attacks, you can replace a single attack with
a called shot. You may only attempt one called shot per round.

\

**Normal**: You can make one called shot per round as a standard
action.

**Greater Called Shot:** You can make multiple called shots where
others could land but one.

**Prerequisites**: Int 13, [Combat Expertise], Improved Called
Shot, base attack bonus +6.

\

**Benefit**: Whenever you make an attack, you can choose to
replace that attack with a called shot. You can make multiple
called shots in a single round. Each additional called shot after
the first made in the same round takes a –5 penalty. In addition,
a called shot that deals half the creature's hit points of damage
(minimum 40) is a debilitating blow.

\

**Normal**: You can make only one called shot in a round as a
standard action. A called shot that deals 50 points of damage is
a debilitating blow.

### Called Shot Effects

The consequences of a successful called shot vary depending on
whether the hit is a normal hit, a critical hit, or a
debilitating blow (a hit for 50 points of damage or more). When
more than one limb or organ can be affected by a called shot, the
attacker can choose the target if desired; otherwise, it should
be determined randomly.

**Called Shot**: An attack aimed at a body part that deals fewer
than 50 points of damage results in a normal called shot. Called
shots inflict either minor penalties or temporary inconveniences.

**Critical Called Shot**: When a called shot is confirmed as a
critical hit but deals fewer than half the creature's hit points
of damage (minimum 50), a critical called shot results. Critical
called shots can cause ability damage, bleeding, and other
serious effects.

**Debilitating Blow**: A called shot that deals half the
creature's hit points of damage (minimum 50) or more (whether a
critical hit or not) results in a debilitating blow that has
extra effects. A debilitating blow inflicts major consequences
and potentially permanent consequences.

**Concentration Checks**: Concentration checks forced by called
shots to parts of the body involved in spellcasting (generally
the head for spells with verbal components, and the casting arm
and hand for spells with somatic components) are made at a –5
penalty.

**Healing Called Shot Effects**: Some called shot effects render
a given location useless until healed. Remedying this condition
requires the victim be healed (naturally or magically, and by one
or more sources of healing) for as many hit points of damage as
the called shot caused. If the victim is suffering from multiple
wounds of this sort, divide healing equally between them. The
*[regenerate]* spell repairs any and all effects of called shots
except for ability damage and ability drain.

  Location   Type          Penalty
  ---------- ------------- ---------
  Head       Tricky        –5
  Ear        Challenging   –10
  Eye        Challenging   –10
  Neck       Challenging   –10
  Chest      Easy          –2
  Heart      Challenging   –10
  Vitals     Tricky        –5
  Arm        Easy          –2
  Hand       Tricky        –5
  Leg        Easy          –2

  : Table: Called Shot Locations

\

### Arm

Arms are the manipulating limbs of a creature, including
tentacles. Wings are also considered to be arms for purposes of a
called shot. Called shots to the arm are easy (–2 penalty).

**Called Shot**: A called shot to an arm deals no additional
damage, but for 1d4 rounds, any attack rolls, ability checks, or
skill checks made using the wounded arm take a –2 penalty. A
flying creature shot in the wing must make a [Fly] check to avoid
descending involuntarily .

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit to the arm deals 1d4
points of Dexterity damage and 1d4 points of Strength damage. A
successful Fortitude saving throw halves the ability damage
(minimum 1 point to each attribute). The target also suffers the
effects of a called shot to the arm for 1d4 minutes.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow deals 1d6 points of
Dexterity damage and 1d6 points of Strength damage. The blow
renders the arm useless until healed unless the target succeeds
at a Fortitude saving throw. If the saving throw fails by 5 or
more, the arm is severed or otherwise mangled such that only
*regeneration* or similar effects can repair it. The target also
suffers the effects of a called shot to the arm (if the arm
remains usable) for 2d6 minutes.

### Chest

Called shots to the chest are aimed at the well-protected center
of mass of a creature. Called shots to the chest are easy (–2
penalty).

**Called Shot**: A called shot to the chest deals no additional
damage, but any skill checks caused by the hit (such as an
[Acrobatics] check while balancing or a [Climb] check while
climbing) take a –2 penalty.

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit to the chest deals 1d4
points of Constitution damage and fatigues the target. A
successful Fortitude saving throw (made after the Constitution
damage is applied) negates the fatigue. The creature also suffers
the effects of a called shot to the chest.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow to the chest deals 2d4
points of Constitution damage and exhausts the target. A
successful Fortitude saving throw (made after the Constitution
damage is applied) reduces the exhaustion to fatigue. If the
saving throw fails by 5 or more, the creature's internal injuries
deal 1 point of Constitution damage in any round the creature
takes a standard action. The internal injuries can be healed by
either a DC 25 [Heal] check or by healing as many hit points as
the debilitating blow dealt, whether by magical or natural
means. The creature also suffers the effects of a called shot to
the chest.

### Ear

Ears are the organs used to hear. Creatures without visible ears
generally aren't susceptible to called shots to that location.
Called shots to the ear are challenging (–10 penalty).

**Called Shot**: A called shot to the ear deafens that ear for 1
round, and imposes a –2 penalty on [Perception] checks. A
creature that loses hearing in all ears is deafened until hearing
is returned by way of the *[remove blindness/deafness]* spell or
a similar effect.

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit to the ear deafens that
ear for 2d6 minutes and leaves the target staggered for 1 round.
The target also suffers the effects of a called shot to the ear
for that duration.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow to the ear destroys
that ear and stuns the target for 1 round, then leaves it
staggered for 1d4 rounds, and deafened until removed with the
remove *[blindness/deafness] spell* or a similar effect. A
successful Fortitude saving throw deafens the creature until it
is restored by the *[remove blindness/deafness]* spell or a
similar effect.

### Eye

Eyes include whatever organs a creature uses to see. At the Game
Master's discretion, a called shot to the eye can also target
sensory organs such as antennae, potentially negating abilities
like blindsense. Generally, a creature can't be blinded until it
has lost all vision in all of its eyes. Creatures with five or
more eyes take no penalties from called shots to their eyes until
they're blinded in enough eyes to bring them down a single
functional eye, but can still be blinded in that eye by a
critical hit or debilitating blow. Called shots to the eye are
challenging (–10 penalty).

**Called Shot**: A called shot to the eye gives all of the
target's foes concealment against its attacks for 1 round and
gives it a –2 penalty on [Perception] checks. If the creature
only has one functional eye prior to the called shot, it is
blinded for 1 round instead.

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit to the eye costs the
target sight in that eye for 1d4 minutes. The target also suffers
the effects of a called shot to the eye for that duration.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow to the eye destroys
that eye, causes blindness until the condition is removed with a
*[remove blindness/deafness]* spell or similar effect, and deals
1d6 points of bleed damage. A successful Reflex saving throw
reduces this to 1d4 hours of loss of sight in that eye and
eliminates the bleeding. The target also suffers the effects of a
called shot to the eye for 2d6 minutes.

### Hand

Hands include most extremities used for fine manipulation. Called
shots to the hand are tricky (–5 penalty).

**Called Shot**: For 1d4 rounds, any attack rolls, damage rolls,
ability checks, or skill checks made using the wounded hand take
a –2 penalty, including attack and damage rolls with two-handed
weapons. In addition, the target takes a –4 penalty to its CMD to
resist disarm attempts, and drops its weapon (if any) on an
attack roll result of a natural 1.

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit to the hand deals 1d4
points of Dexterity damage. In addition, the target drops
anything it is holding in that hand unless it succeeds at a
Reflex saving throw. Items held in two hands aren't dropped, but
the target still loses its grip with the injured hand. The target
also suffers the effects of a called shot to the hand for 1d4
minutes.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow deals 1d6 points of
Dexterity damage. The blow renders the hand useless until healed
unless the target succeeds at a Reflex saving throw. If the
saving throw fails by 5 or more, the hand is severed or otherwise
mangled such that only *regeneration* or similar effects can
repair it. Regardless of the result of the saving throw, anything
held in the wounded hand is automatically dropped, even items
held in two or more hands. The target also suffers the effects of
a called shot to the hand (if the hand remains usable) for 2d6
minutes.

### Head

Called shots to the head are tricky (–5 penalty), as most
creatures show some skill at dodging attacks aimed at their
faces. Some creatures, such as otyughs and purple worms, lack a
proper head altogether. Creatures with multiple heads must be hit
by called shots to all their heads in a single round to suffer
ill effects, and even then, only suffer the least effect that is
inflicted on any single head (so for example, an ettin would need
to take critical hits to both heads to receive the effects of a
critical called shot to the head).

**Called Shot**: A called shot to the head leaves the target
sickened for 1d4 rounds.

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit to the head deals 1d6
points of Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma damage (randomly
determine which) and staggers the target for 1d4 rounds. A
successful Fortitude saving throw prevents the target from being
staggered. The target also suffers the effects of a called shot
to the head for 1d4 minutes.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow to the head deals 1d6
points of Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma damage (roll
separately for each), and knocks the target unconscious for 1d10
rounds. A successful Fortitude saving throw prevents the target
from being knocked unconscious, but leaves it staggered for 1d10
rounds instead. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the
target is rendered senseless by severe brain trauma (as the
*[feeblemind]* spell) until it receives a *[heal]*, *[greater
restoration]*, or similar effect. The target also suffers the
effects of a called shot to the head for 2d6 minutes.

### Heart

A called shot to the heart represents an attempt at a killing
blow. If the hit isn't either a critical hit or a debilitating
blow, the attempt fails and is just a normal hit. A called shot
to the heart can be used for any small, likely fatal location on
a creature, such as the only weakness on an unimaginably ancient
red dragon. Called shots to the heart are challenging (–10
penalty).

**Called Shot**: A called shot to the heart is just a normal hit
with no extra effect.

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit to the heart pierces the
organ, causing exhaustion and 1d4 points of Constitution bleed
damage. A successful Fortitude save reduces this to fatigue and 1
point of Constitution bleed damage. In either case, stopping the
bleeding requires either *regeneration* (spell or special
ability), magic healing that heals as many points of damage (from
one or more sources) as the original blow dealt, or a successful
DC 20 heal check that takes 1d4 rounds to complete.

A critical hit to the heart against a vampire made with a
piercing weapon composed entirely of wood leaves the vampire
impaled through the heart by the weapon if it fails its Fortitude
save.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow to the heart destroys
it, instantly killing any creature that relies on its heart to
survive. Creatures that succeed at a Fortitude save suffer
exhaustion and take 1d6 points of Constitution damage and 1d4
points of Constitution bleed damage, as do creatures that can
survive without a heart.

A debilitating blow to the heart against a vampire made with a
piercing weapon made entirely of wood affects the vampire as a
critical hit to the heart; for example, it still receives a
Fortitude save to avoid the consequences.

### Leg

Legs are the ambulatory limbs of a creature, including feet.
Called shots to the leg have no special effect on creatures with
five or more legs. Called shots to the leg are easy (–2 penalty).

**Called Shot**: A called shot to a leg lowers the target
creature's speed by 10 feet for 1d4 rounds if it has two or fewer
legs, and by 5 feet if it has three or four legs. In either case,
the creature's speed cannot be reduced below 5 feet per round.
Called shots to the leg have no effect on creatures with five or
more legs. Hitting the same leg more than once has no extra
effect, but the speed penalty for hits on different legs stack.
Additionally, any skill or ability checks involving movement
(such as [Acrobatics] or [Swim] checks) take a –2 penalty for 1d4
rounds.

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit to the leg deals 1d4
points of Dexterity damage and knocks the target prone. A
successful Fortitude save keeps the creature from falling prone.
The creature also suffers the effects of a called shot to the leg
for 1d4 minutes.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow to the leg knocks the
creature prone. The blow renders the leg entirely useless until
healed unless the target succeeds at a Fortitude saving throw. If
the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the leg is severed or
otherwise mangled such that only *regeneration* or similar
effects can repair it. If the save succeeds, the target is
instead lamed and moves at half speed until the leg is healed, or
until it receives a successful DC 20 [Heal] check. A creature
with a useless or severed leg moves at half speed if it still has
more than half of its legs usable; otherwise, it cannot stand up
and must crawl to move. The target also suffers the effects of a
called shot to the leg (if the leg remains usable) for 2d6
minutes.

### Neck

The neck makes for a difficult but rewarding target. Injuries to
the neck keep a creature from speaking easily, and if blood
vessels or the windpipe are damaged, such injuries rapidly lead
to death. Creatures that lack vulnerable heads generally can't be
attacked in the neck either. Called shots to the neck are
challenging (–10 penalty).

**Called Shot**: A called shot to the neck makes speaking above a
hoarse whisper impossible for 1 round. Spells with verbal
components have a 20% chance of failing outright, as do attempts
to activate command-word items (although for magic items, the use
of the item is not wasted).

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit to the neck deals 1d6
points of bleed damage. In addition, the target must succeed at a
Fortitude saving throw or suffer a crushed windpipe and be unable
to breathe or speak, possibly suffocating . A crushed windpipe
can be repaired by magical healing (from one or more sources)
that heals as many hit points of damage as the original hit
dealt, or by a DC 25 [Heal] check to open up a hole into the
windpipe. The latter check deals 2d6 hit points of damage, and
leaves the creature still unable to speak. If target makes its
saving throw, it still suffers the effects of a called shot to
the neck for 1d4 minutes.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow to the neck leaves the
target unable to speak or breathe and deals 1d4 points of
Constitution bleed damage. A successful Fortitude saving throw
reduces this to 2d6 points of regular (hit point) bleed damage,
and the target is only unable to speak and breathe for 1d4
minutes. The Constitution bleed damage caused by a debilitating
blow to the neck can only be stopped by *regeneration* (spell or
special ability), magical healing (from one or more sources) that
heals as many points of damage as the original blow dealt, or a
DC 20 [Heal] check that takes 1d4 rounds to complete.

### Vitals

The vitals correspond to the abdomen on a humanoid: critical
organs not well-protected by bone. Attacks on the vitals can also
include dastardly “low blows.” Vitals for non-humanoid creatures
can include nearly any location that is relatively hard to hit,
poorly protected, and debilitating if struck. Called shots to the
vitals are tricky (–5 penalty).

**Called Shot**: A called shot to the vitals leaves the target
sickened for 1d4 rounds. A successful Fortitude save reduces this
duration to 1 round. While sickened from the blow, the target
cannot run or charge.

**Critical Called Shot**: A critical hit deals 1d4 points of
Constitution damage. In addition, the target is nauseated for 1d4
rounds and sickened for 1d6 minutes. A successful Fortitude
saving throw negates the nauseated condition. While the target is
sickened from the blow, it cannot run or charge.

**Debilitating Blow**: A debilitating blow to the vitals deals
1d6 points of Constitution drain, nauseates the target for 1d4
rounds, and sickens it for 2d6 minutes. A successful Fortitude
save reduces the drain to damage and the nausea to 1 round. If
the save fails by 5 or more, the target is disemboweled or
otherwise horrifically wounded, and takes 1 point of Constitution
bleed damage. The Constitution bleed damage caused by a
debilitating blow to the vitals can only be stopped by
*regeneration* (spell or special ability), magical healing that
heals as many points of damage (from one or more sources) as the
original blow dealt, or a DC 20 [Heal] check that takes 1d4
rounds to complete.

Piecemeal Armor

## Piecemeal Armor 

All armor in the PF Roleplaying Game is constructed of pieces and
parts that are carefully (or hastily) donned each time the armor
is used. While a full suit of armor is always more protective
than wearing pieces of armor, sometimes a character does not have
time to don an entire suit of armor before jumping into the fray.
Other times characters may not have access to an entire suit of
armor; in dire situations, they may need to find pieces or parts
of armor among lower-level treasure hoards, or they have to
scavenge from the bodies of fallen foes in order to protect
themselves.

The following rules allow you to introduce piecemeal armor into
your campaign. All of the armors presented are separated into
three different and distinct sections or pieces: arms, legs, and
torso.

### Armor Pieces and Armor Suits

The piecemeal armor system splits up armor into three general
types of armor pieces. An armor piece is a small group of armor
parts, rather than simply being any discrete part of the armor. A
single armor piece comprises the armor parts one needs to protect
its corresponding area—either the arms, the legs, or the torso
(including the head); a single arm or leg armor piece provides
armor for both arms or both legs, respectively. A plate arm armor
piece typically consists of pairs of pauldrons, gardbraces,
rerebraces, vambraces, and gauntlets along with bits of chainmail
and padded armor, while a chain lamellar arm armor piece consists
of two chain sleeves, gauntlets, and perhaps pairs of pauldrons
and couters. Both protect the arms, though they have a different
number of specific parts and types of overall components.

If a character has only one armor piece, that piece is considered
the totality of her armor, and she uses the statistics of that
piece as her armor. If a character is wearing more than one armor
piece, she add the armor costs, armor bonuses, and weights of the
armor pieces, and takes the worst maximum Dexterity bonus, arcane
spell failure chance, and speed limitations from among the
various armor pieces to determine the full statistics and
qualities of the armor she is wearing. As long as she is wearing
a single armor piece, she is considered to be wearing armor for
any effects that rely on wearing armor (such as the fighter
class's armor training and armor mastery).

If a character is wearing all three categories of armor pieces,
she is wearing a suit of armor. Suits of armor can have all armor
pieces of the same type (all three plate pieces make a suit of
full plate), or a mixture of armor pieces (a plate arm armor
piece and torso armor piece combined with a chainmail leg armor
piece creates a suit of half-plate). Wearing an entire suit,
whether its pieces are mixed or the same type, grants a +1 armor
bonus on top of the protection the combination of pieces already
grants the wearer. Wearing a mixed suit of armor increases the
arcane spell failure chance by 5% because of the awkwardness of
the design. Wearing less than a full suit of mixed armor does not
increase the wearer's arcane spell failure chance.

For example, if you wear a breastplate with a plate arm armor
piece and a chain leg armor piece, you should consult the
Half-Plate Suit Pieces Table for your armor's statistics. The top
line lists the cost, bonuses, penalties, and so on for the
half-plate suit as a whole, and the lines below list the
statistics for the component pieces, as well as the benefits that
result from the pieces constituting a suit.

### Armor Pieces and Proficiency

If you are proficient with an armor category, you are also
proficient with the armor pieces of that category. For example,
if you are proficient with light armor, you are proficient with
all light armor pieces. Some torso armor pieces (such as chain,
plate, and agile plate torso armor pieces) are a category lighter
if worn alone (treat as a chain shirt, breastplate, and agile
breastplate, respectively).

When a character is wearing at least one armor piece of a type
with which he is not proficient, he takes the armor check penalty
of that piece on attack rolls and on all skill checks that
involve moving. If he is wearing more than one armor piece of a
type with which he is not proficient, he takes the worst armor
check penalty from among the pieces he is not proficient with on
attack rolls and on all skill checks that involve moving.

Table: Half-Plate Suit Pieces

+----------+------+------+-----+-------+-------+------+------+------+
|Armor     |Cost  |Armor\|Max  |Armor  |Arcane |30 ft.|20 ft.|Weight|
|Type      |      |Bonus |Dex  |Check  |Spell  |      |      |      |
|          |      |      |Bonus|Penalty|Failure|      |      |      |
|          |      |      |     |       |Chance |      |      |      |
+----------+------+------+-----+-------+-------+------+------+------+
|Half-plate|600 gp|+8    |+0   |–7     |40%    |20 ft.|15 ft.|50    |
|          |      |      |     |       |       |      |      |lbs.  |
+----------+------+------+-----+-------+-------+------+------+------+
|(plate arm|375 gp|+1    |+0   |–7     |35%    |30 ft.|20 ft.|10    |
|armor     |      |      |     |       |       |      |      |lbs.  |
|piece)    |      |      |     |       |       |      |      |      |
+----------+------+------+-----+-------+-------+------+------+------+
|(chain leg|25 gp |+0    |+2   |–2     |15%    |30 ft.|20 ft.|10    |
|armor     |      |      |     |       |       |      |      |lbs.  |
|piece)    |      |      |     |       |       |      |      |      |
+----------+------+------+-----+-------+-------+------+------+------+
|(plate    |200 gp|+6    |+3   |–4     |35%    |20 ft.|15 ft.|30    |
|torso     |      |      |     |       |       |      |      |lbs.  |
|armor     |      |      |     |       |       |      |      |      |
|piece)    |      |      |     |       |       |      |      |      |
+----------+------+------+-----+-------+-------+------+------+------+
|(suit)    |—     |+1    |—    |—      |+5%    |—     |—     |—     |
+----------+------+------+-----+-------+-------+------+------+------+

### Masterwork, Special Material, and Magic Armor
   

Any individual armor piece can be of masterwork construction or
constructed of special materials, or, if it is of masterwork
construction, it can be magically enchanted at the standard cost.
In this manner, each armor piece is treated as its own type of
armor, but most armorers and magic item crafters know that this
is an inefficient way of making and enchanting armor.

The most efficient way to create masterwork armor or to enchant
magical armor is to create or enchant the same suit. In order to
do this, the suit's pieces need not all be of the same type, but
they must be constructed and then enchanted together. The
drawback is that none of the individual pieces are considered
masterwork or magical on their own (though if magic, they do
detect as magic, and can be identified as part of an armor suit).
When used as piecemeal armor, they function like normal pieces of
nonmagical and non-masterwork pieces of armor of their type.

If a character is wearing pieces of separately created or
enchanted armor, the armor only takes the benefits provided by
the masterwork quality and the magic of the most protective
piece—typically the torso armor piece. If a character does not
wear a torso armor piece, the most protective piece is the leg
armor piece (the second most protective category of armor
pieces), followed by the arm armor piece (the third most
protective category).

For instance, if a character does not wear a torso or leg armor
piece, but wears a *+1 chain arm armor piece*, she gains the
benefit of wearing magic armor (the piece acts as masterwork and
has a +1 enhancement bonus due to the enchantment). If that
character then puts on a normal chain torso armor piece, she
loses the +1 bonus due to magic and the reduction of armor check
penalties for being masterwork, as the most protective armor
piece no longer has either of these qualities.

In order for the armor to gain the benefits of a special
material, all armor pieces worn must be made of the same special
material. Because of this, armor pieces constructed of special
materials can be constructed at a decreased cost based on which
pieces are made of the special material. Constructing a whole
suit of armor with the same special materials uses the standard
costs.

In the case of chain shirts, breastplates, agile breastplates,
and any other armor pieces that are treated as a category lighter
when worn alone, to determine the cost of creating that piece of
armor from a special material, use the base armor category
(medium in the case of a chain torso armor piece, and heavy in
the case of a plate torso armor piece) when pricing the item, but
in the case of adamantine and similar armors, the item gains the
material benefit of the lighter category (damage reduction 1/— in
the case of the chain torso armor piece worn as a chain shirt, or
damage reduction 2/— in the case of plate torso armor piece worn
as a breastplate).

### Adamantine

Armor pieces made of adamantine grant their wearers damage
reduction of 1/— if they are light armor, 2/— if they are medium
armor, and 3/— if they are heavy armor. Adamantine armor pieces
are always masterwork in quality. Armor pieces normally made of
steel that are made of adamantine have one-third more hit points
than normal.

  Type of Adamantine Item    Cost Modifier
  -------------------------- ---------------
  Medium arm armor piece     2,500 gp
  Medium leg armor piece     2,500 gp
  Medium torso armor piece   5,000 gp
  Heavy arm armor piece      2,500 gp
  Heavy leg armor piece      2,500 gp
  Heavy torso armor piece    10,000 gp

  : Table: Adamantine Item Costs

### Dragonhide

If the dragonhide used to construct this armor comes from a
dragon that had immunity to an energy type, the armor pieces also
have immunity to that energy type, but only confer the immunity
on the wearer if he is wearing a suit of armor made entirely of
dragonhide from the same type of dragon. A piece of dragonhide
armor costs double the armor piece cost + 100 gp. Alternatively,
a plate torso armor piece can be constructed from dragonhide for
700 gp, and an agile plate torso armor piece can be constructed
from dragonhide for 1,100 gp; if either is worn alone, it bestows
any energy damage immunity possessed by the dragon to the wearer.

### Mithral

Armor pieces made of mithral are lighter than steel, but are just
as hard. Mithral armor pieces are less cumbersome to move in.
Medium armor pieces that feature a reduced movement do not have a
reduced movement when they are made from mithral. Heavy armor
pieces that reduce the wearer's run speed to triple her speed
instead of quadruple her speed do not do so when they are made
from mithral or are part of a mithral armor suit.

As long as all the armor pieces a character wears are made of
mithral, the spell failure chance decreases by 10%, the maximum
Dexterity bonus increases by 2, and the armor check penalty
decreases by 3 (to a minimum of 0).

An item made of mithral weighs half as much as the same item made
from other metals. Armor pieces made of mithral are also
considered masterwork.

  Type of Mithral Item       Item Cost Modifier
  -------------------------- --------------------
  Medium arm armor piece     1,500 gp
  Medium leg armor piece     1,500 gp
  Medium torso armor piece   1,000 gp
  Heavy arm armor piece      2,500 gp
  Heavy leg armor piece      2,500 gp
  Heavy torso armor piece    4,000 gp

  : Table: Mithral Item Costs

## Getting Into and Out of Armor Pieces

The time required to don an armor piece is based on its type and
the area it protects.

**Don**: This column tells how long it takes a character to put
on the armor piece. (One minute is 10 rounds.)

**Don Hastily**: This column tells how long it takes a character
to put on the armor piece in a hurry. The armor check penalty and
armor bonus for hastily donned armor are each 1 point worse than
normal (minimum 0 in the case of armor bonus).

**Remove**: This column tells how long it takes a character to
remove the armor piece.

Table: Donning Armor Pieces
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Armor Piece    |Don            |Don Hastily    |Remove         |
|Type and       |               |               |               |
|Protective Area|               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Light arm armor|2 rounds       |1 round        |2 rounds^1^    |
|piece          |               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Light leg armor|3 rounds       |2 rounds       |2 rounds^1^    |
|piece          |               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Light torso    |5 rounds       |2 rounds       |5 rounds^1^    |
|armor piece    |               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Medium arm     |1 minute^1^    |2 rounds       |2 rounds^1^    |
|armor piece    |               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Medium leg     |1 minute^1^    |3 rounds       |2 rounds^1^    |
|armor piece    |               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Medium torso   |1 minute^1^    |5 rounds       |3 rounds^1^    |
|armor piece    |               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Heavy arm armor|1 minute^2^    |1 minute^1^    |1 minute^1^    |
|piece          |               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Heavy leg armor|1 minute^2^    |1 minute^1^    |1 minute^1^    |
|piece          |               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
|Heavy torso    |2 minutes^2^   |1 minute^1^    |2 minute^1^    |
|armor piece    |               |               |               |
+---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

^1^ If the character has some help, this time is halved. A single
character doing nothing else can help one or two adjacent
creatures. Two characters can't help each other don or remove
armor pieces at the same time.\
^2^ The wearer must have help to don this armor piece. Without
help, it can only be donned hastily.

## Armor Pieces for Unusual Creatures

Armor pieces for unusually big creatures, unusually little
creatures, and non-humanoid creatures (such as horses) have
different costs and weights from those given in the Arm Armor,
Leg Armor and Torso Armor tables. Refer to the appropriate line
in the [Armor for Unusal Creatures table] and apply the
multipliers to cost and weight. For animals with four or more
legs, the armor for half of the legs counts as the leg armor
piece, and the armor for the other half counts as the arm armor
piece.

## Armor and Armor Piece hit Points and hardness

To determine the hit points and hardness of your armor, use the
hardness for the weakest material, and to determine hit points,
add the total armor bonus (including the +1 for wearing a
complete suit of armor) and multiply that value by 5. If you need
to determine the hardness and hit points for a single armor
piece, it has the hardness of its main material and hit points
equal to its armor bonus (treat as +1 for armor pieces with a +0
armor bonus) × 5. Hardness for substances can be found in the
[Substance Hardness and Hit Points table].

## Armor Piece Descriptions

The following pieces of armor make up the piecemeal armor system,
and are split into three armor groups.

### Arms

Table: Arm Armor Pieces



Armor Type

Cost

Armor\
Bonus

Maximum\
Dex Bonus

Armor\
Check Penalty

Arcane Spell\
Failure Chance

Speed\

30 ft.

20 ft.

Weight^1^

*Light Armor*

Lamellar, leather

15 gp

+0

+3

–1

20%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Leather

2 gp

+0

+6

0

10%

30 ft.

20 ft.

2 lbs.

Padded

1 gp

+0

+8

0

5%

30 ft.

20 ft.

2 lbs.

Quilted cloth

25 gp

+0

+8

0

10%

30 ft.

20 ft.

2 lbs.

Studded leather

5 gp

+0

+5

0

15%

30 ft.

20 ft.

2 lbs.

Wooden

5 gp

+0

+3

–1

15%

30 ft.

20 ft.

3 lbs.

*Medium Armor*

Hide

2 gp

+0

+4

–2

20%

30 ft.

20 ft.

3 lbs.

Kikko

5 gp

+0

+5

–1

20%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Chain

25 gp

+1

+2

–3

30%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Lamellar, horn

25 gp

+1

+5

–2

25%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Lamellar, steel

25 gp

+1

+3

–2

25%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Mountain pattern

50 gp

+1

+3

–2

30%

30 ft.

20 ft.

10 lbs.

Scale

10 gp

+1

+3

–2

25%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

*Heavy Armor*

Agile plate

425 gp

+1

+0

–7

40%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Banded

50 gp

+1

+1

–3

35%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Kusari gusoku

50 gp

+1

+1

–3

35%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Lamellar, iron

50 gp

+1

+0

–4

40%

30 ft.

20 ft.

10 lbs.

O-yoroi

250 gp

+1

+2

–5

35%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Plate

375 gp

+1

+1

–7

35%

30 ft.

20 ft.

10 lbs.

Splint

50 gp

+1

+0

–4

40%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Tatami-do

100 gp

+1

+3

–5

35%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

^1^ Weight figures are for armor pieces sized to fit Medium
characters. Armor pieces fitted for Small characters weigh half
as much, and armor pieces fitted for Large characters weigh twice
as much.

With the smallest area to protect, arm armor pieces tend to have
the lowest armor value of all the piecemeal armor types, with
light armor pieces offering little to no protection unless they
are part of a complete suit. Because arm armor pieces tend to
interfere with hand movements needed for somatic components, they
offer the highest spell failure chance.

**Agile Plate Arm Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists of
pauldrons, gardbraces, rerebraces, vambraces, and gauntlets all
cunningly designed to increase the maneuverability of the wearer.
When worn alone, with an agile plate torso armor piece, or with
an agile plate torso armor piece and a chain leg armor piece (or
lighter armor), the armor check penalty for [Climb] skill and
jump checks is only –4 (masterwork and mithral versions of this
armor and the above armor piece combination reduce this penalty
as well as the normal penalty).

**Banded Arm Armor Piece**: These overlapping strips of metal on
leather usually take the form of long sleeves connected to
pauldrons of the same material at the top of the sleeves and a
pair of metal gauntlets at the hands of the armor piece.

**Chain Arm Armor Piece**: This arm armor piece typically takes
the form of sleeves of loose-fitting chain fitted to the
shoulder, or separate lengths of chain attached to pauldrons and
couters, and ending in a pair of gauntlets at the hands.

**Hide Arm Armor Piece:**This arm armor piece consists of sleeves
crafted from the tanned and preserved skin of a thick-skinned
beast.

**Horn Lamellar Arm Armor Piece**: This arm armor piece is
constructed of a number of horn plates laced together in parallel
rows and reinforced with leather.

**Iron Lamellar Arm Armor Piece**: This arm armor piece is
constructed of a number of iron plates laced together in parallel
rows and reinforced with pieces of chainmail.

**Kikko Arm Armor Piece**: This arm armor piece consists of
sleeves of leather reinforced by hexagonal plates made from iron.

**Kusari Gusoku Arm Armor Piece**: This arm armor piece is
constructed of light lamellar shoulder guards and lacquered
sleeves.

**Leather Arm Armor Piece**: This arm armor piece consists of
sleeves of hard-boiled leather that are carefully sewn together.

**Leather Lamellar Arm Armor Piece**: Similar to a leather arm
armor piece, a leather lamellar arm armor piece is constructed of
a number of discrete hard-boiled leather plates laced together in
parallel rows.

**Mountain Pattern Arm Armor Piece**: These sleeves are made from
many interlocking pieces of steel shaped to resemble a symbol for
the word “mountain” and riveted onto cloth.

**O-Yoroi Arm Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists of steel
lamellar shoulder guards, and sleeves made of metal reinforced
with leather. O-yoroi arms end in gauntlets.

**Padded Arm Armor Piece**: These sleeves are made of heavy or
quilted cloth.

**Plate Arm Armor Piece**: A plate lamellar is composed of
pauldrons, gardbraces, rerebraces, vambraces, and gauntlets,
along with bits of chainmail and padded armor.

**Quilted Cloth Arm Armor Piece**: These sleeves are made of
heavy quilted cloth specially designed to trap arrows and other
ranged piercing weapons. When worn alone, or with only other
quilted cloth pieces, you gain DR 3/— against ranged piercing
weapons.

**Scale Arm Armor Piece**: These sleeves are made up of dozens of
small overlapping metal plates. A scale arm armor piece includes
a pair of gauntlets.

**Splint Arm Armor Piece**: These sleeves are constructed of
metal strips reinforced with chain mail. A splint arm armor piece
includes a pair of gauntlets.

**Steel Lamellar Arm Armor Piece**: These sleeves are constructed
of a number of steel plates laced together in parallel rows. A
steel lamellar arm armor piece includes a pair of gauntlets.

**Studded Leather Arm Armor Piece**: These sleeves are
constructed of hard-boiled leather carefully sewn together and
reinforced with metal studs.

**Tatami-Do Arm Armor Piece**: A lighter version of o-yoroi
armor, a tatami-do arm armor piece is composed of a lighter
lamellar shoulder guard and a lacquered sleeve. A set of
tatami-do arm armor pieces includes a pair of gauntlets.

**Wooden Arm Armor Piece**: These sleeves are constructed of
fire-treated wood sewn over leather.

### Legs

Table: Leg Armor Pieces

Armor Type

Cost

Armor\
Bonus

Maximum\
Dex Bonus

Armor\
Check Penalty

Arcane Spell\
Failure Chance

Speed\

30 ft.

20 ft.

Weight^1^

*Light Armor*

Leather

3 gp

+0

+6

0

0%

30 ft.

20 ft.

3 lbs.

Padded

1 gp

+0

+8

0

0%

30 ft.

20 ft.

3 lbs.

Quilted cloth

25 gp

+0

+8

0

5%

30 ft.

20 ft.

3 lbs.

Lamellar, leather

15 gp

+1

+2

–1

10%

30 ft.

20 ft.

10 lbs.

Studded leather

5 gp

+1

+5

0

10%

30 ft.

20 ft.

3 lbs.

Wooden

5 gp

+1

+3

–1

5%

30 ft.

20 ft.

7 lbs.

*Medium Armor*

Chain

25 gp

+0

+2

–2

15%

30 ft.

20 ft.

10 lbs.

Hide

3 gp

+1

+4

–2

10%

30 ft.

20 ft.

7 lbs.

Kikko

10 gp

+1

+3

–1

10%

20 ft.

15 ft.

5 lbs.

Lamellar, horn

25 gp

+1

+3

–2

10%

20 ft.

15 ft.

5 lbs.

Lamellar, steel

25 gp

+1

+3

–2

15%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Mountain pattern

50 gp

+1

+3

–2

15%

20 ft.

15 ft.

10 lbs.

Scale

10 gp

+1

+3

–2

15%

30 ft.

20 ft.

10 lbs.

Heavy Armor

Banded

50 gp

+1

+1

–3

15%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

10 lbs.

Kusari gusoku

100 gp

+1

+1

–3

20%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

10 lbs.

Lamellar, iron

50 gp

+1

+1

–4

20%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

10 lbs.

Plate

925 gp

+1

+1

–3

20%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

10 lbs.

Splint

50 gp

+1

+0

–4

20%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

15 lbs.

Tatami-do

150 gp

+1

+3

–3

15%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

5 lbs.

O-yoroi

300 gp

+2

+2

–3

20%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

5 lbs.

^1^ Weight figures are for armor pieces sized to fit Medium
characters. Armor pieces fitted for Small characters weigh half
as much, and armor pieces fitted for Large characters weigh twice
as much.\
 ^2^ When running while wearing this armor piece, you move at
only triple your speed, not quadruple.

Heavier leg armor pieces slow down their wearers and provide
higher armor check penalties, but are less restrictive to
spellcasters than heavier arm armor pieces.

**Banded Leg Armor Piece**: These overlapping strips of metal on
leather usually take the form of leggings or a skirt.

**Chain Leg Armor Piece**: A chain leg piece takes the form of a
long skirt made of chainmail that is further protected by steel
greaves, or individual leggings of tighter-fitting chain
reinforced by padding, steel kneeplates, and leather straps.

**Hide Leg Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists of leggings
or a skirt made of the tanned and preserved skin of a
thick-skinned beast.

**Horn Lamellar Leg Armor Piece**: These leggings are constructed
of a number of horn plates laced together in parallel rows and
reinforced with leather. Sometimes they take the form of a skirt
made of such material. When in skirt form, the legs are further
protected by leather greaves reinforced by horn.

**Iron Lamellar Leg Armor Piece**: These leggings are constructed
of a number of iron plates laced together in parallel rows and
reinforced with chainmail. Sometimes they take the form of a
skirt. The legs are further protected by leather greaves
reinforced with iron.

**Kikko Leg Armor Piece**: This leg armor piece is usually
constructed of a leather skirt reinforced by hexagonal plates
made from iron, and the legs are further protected by leather
greaves reinforced with steel. Some versions of this leg armor
piece consist of individual leather leggings reinforced by
hexagonal plates.

**Kusari Gusoku Leg Armor Piece**: This armor piece is
constructed of light lamellar thigh guards and quilted cloth or
leather leggings.

**Leather Lamellar Leg Armor Piece**: This leg armor piece is
constructed of a number of discrete hard-boiled leather plates
laced together in parallel rows. They can take the form of a
skirt or leggings.

**Leather Leg Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists of
leggings or a skirt constructed of hard-boiled leather carefully
sewn together.

**Mountain Pattern Leg Armor Piece**: The protection of this leg
armor piece usually takes the form of a long skirt constructed of
many interlocking pieces of steel riveted onto cloth, along with
heavy cloth or leather greaves reinforced with steel plates. Some
versions are made into individual leggings.

**O-Yoroi Leg Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists of steel
lamellar thigh guards and leggings made of metal reinforced with
leather and cloth.

**Padded Leg Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists of leggings
or a skirt made of heavy or quilted cloth.

**Plate Leg Armor Piece**: A plate leg armor piece is composed of
faulds, tassets, cuisses, poleyns, and greaves along with bits of
chainmail and padded armor for extra support and protection.

**Quilted Cloth Leg Armor Piece**: These are leggings made of
heavy quilted cloth. When worn alone, or with only other quilted
cloth pieces, you gain DR 3/— against ranged piercing weapons.

**Scale Leg Armor Piece**: Typically a scale leg piece is a skirt
of overlapping metal plates and leather greaves reinforced with
steel plates. Some suits feature long leggings of overlapping
metal plates instead.

**Splint Leg Armor Piece**: These thigh guards and leggings are
constructed of metal strips and chainmail.

**Steel Lamellar Leg Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists of
thigh guards and leggings or a skirt constructed of steel plates
laced together in parallel rows.

**Studded Leather Leg Armor Piece**: These leggings are
constructed of hard-boiled leather carefully sewn together and
reinforced with metal studs.

**Tatami-Do Leg Armor Piece**: This armor piece is constructed of
light lamellar thigh guards and leggings.

**Wooden Leg Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists of a pair
of leggings or a skirt constructed of fire-treated wood sewn over
leather.

### Torso

Table: Torso Armor Pieces

Armor Type

Cost

Armor\
Bonus

Maximum\
Dex Bonus

Armor\
Check Penalty

Arcane Spell\
Failure Chance

Speed\

30 ft.

20 ft.

Weight^1^

*Light Armor*

Padded

3 gp

+0

+8

0

5%

30 ft.

20 ft.

5 lbs.

Quilted cloth

50 gp

+0

+8

0

10%

30 ft.

20 ft.

10 lbs.

Haramaki

3 gp

+1

+10

0

0%

30 ft.

20 ft.

1 lb.

Leather

5 gp

+1

+6

0

10%

30 ft.

20 ft.

10 lbs.

Silken ceremonial armor

30 gp

+1

+10

0

0%

30 ft.

20 ft.

4 lbs.

Studded leather

15 gp

+1

+5

0

15%

30 ft.

20 ft.

15 lbs.

Wooden

10 gp

+1

+3

–1

15%

30 ft.

20 ft.

15 lbs.

Lamellar cuirass

15 gp

+2

+4

0

5%

30 ft.

20 ft.

8 lbs.

Lamellar, leather

30 gp

+2

+3

–2

20%

30 ft.

20 ft.

10 lbs.

*Medium Armor*

Lamellar, steel

100 gp

+1

+3

–5

25%

20 ft.

15 ft.

25 lbs.

Hide

10 gp

+2

+4

–2

20%

30 ft.

20 ft.

15 lbs.

Kikko

15 gp

+2

+4

–3

20%

20 ft.

15 ft.

15 lbs.

Lamellar, horn

50 gp

+2

+3

–4

25%

20 ft.

15 ft.

20 lbs.

Scale

30 gp

+2

+3

–2

25%

30 ft.

20 ft.

15 lbs.

Mountain pattern

150 gp

+3

+3

–4

30%

20 ft.

15 ft.

20 lbs.

Armored coat

50 gp

+4

+3

–2

20%

20 ft.

15 ft.

20 lbs.

Chain^3^

100 gp

+4

+4

–2

30%

30 ft.

20 ft.

25 lbs.

Do-maru

200 gp

+5

+4

–4

25%

15 ft.

20 ft.

30 lbs.

Four-mirror armor

20 gp

+5

+4

–5

30%

20 ft.

15 ft.

40 lbs.

*Heavy Armor*

Banded

150 gp

+4

+1

–2

35%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

20 lbs.

Kusari gusoku

200 gp

+4

+1

–7

35%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

20 lbs

Lamellar, iron

100 gp

+4

0

–7

40%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

15 lbs.

Splint

100 gp

+4

+0

–3

40%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

25 lbs.

Tatami-do

500 gp

+4

+4

–6

35%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

30 lbs.

O-yoroi

750 gp

+5

+2

–6

35%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

30 lbs.

Agile plate^3^

400 gp

+6

+3

–4

25%

20 ft.

15 ft.

25 lbs.

Plate^3^

200 gp

+6

+3

–4

35%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

30 lbs.

Stone coat

500 gp

+8

0

–7

40%

20 ft.^2^

15 ft.^2^

45 lbs.

^1^ Weight figures are for armor pieces sized to fit Medium
characters. Armor pieces fitted for Small characters weigh half
as much, and armor pieces fitted for Large characters weigh twice
as much.\
 ^2^ When running while wearing this armor piece, you move only
triple your speed, not quadruple.\
 ^3^ These armor pieces are considered to be one weight category
lower when worn with no other armor pieces. A chain torso armor
piece worn alone is a chain shirt (light armor), and a plate or
agile plate torso armor piece is a breastplate (medium armor).

The torso armor piece provides the most protection, but also
usually provides the most hindrances to the wearer.

**Agile Plate Torso Armor Piece**: This breastplate is designed
to allow its wearer extra flexibility. When worn alone, the
wearer's armor check penalty for the [Climb] and jump checks is
only –1 (masterwork and mithral versions of this armor reduce
this penalty as well as the normal penalty).

Alternatively, when worn with an agile lamellar arm armor piece
and a chain leg armor piece (or lighter armor), the armor check
penalty for [Climb] and jump checks is only –4 (masterwork and
mithral versions of this armor and the above armor piece
combination reduce this penalty as well as the normal penalty).

Furthermore, when an agile plate torso armor piece is worn alone,
it is considered to be medium armor instead of heavy armor except
when creating special material versions of this armor.

**Armored Coat**: This sturdy leather coat is reinforced with
metal plates sewn into the lining. While more cumbersome than
other torso armor pieces, and less effective, it can be donned or
removed with a move action (there is no “don hastily” option for
the armored coat). This torso armor piece can be worn with other
armors, but the wearer takes the best armor bonus instead of
adding up all the armor bonuses.

**Banded Torso Armor Piece**: This armor piece is a shirt of
overlapping metal plates reinforcing leather.

**Chain Torso Armor Piece**: This armor piece is a shirt of chain
mail. When worn alone, it is counted as light armor and acts as a
chain shirt.

**Do-Maru**: This light-weight armor piece wraps around the body
like a short armored coat made of lamellar.

**Four-Mirror Armor**: This cuirass consists of four plates
harnessed together with leather shoulder straps. It includes a
helmet.

**Haramaki**: Also called a belly-warmer, a haramaki is a simple
silken sash lined with chainmail or articulated metal plates and
tied about the stomach to protect it.

**Hide Torso Armor Piece**: This armor piece is a shirt, wrap, or
jacket constructed of the tanned and preserved skin of a
thick-skinned beast.

**Horn Lamellar Torso Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists of
a shirt constructed of a number of horn plates that are laced
together in parallel rows and reinforced with leather.

**Iron Lamellar Torso Armor Piece**: This armor piece is a shirt
constructed of a number of iron plates that are laced together in
parallel rows and reinforced with bits of chainmail.

**Kikko Torso Armor Piece**: This armor piece is a shirt of
hexagonal iron plates sewn into cloth or leather.

**Kusari Gusoku Torso Armor Piece**: This chain jacket is worn in
place of heavier chest armor.

**Lamellar Cuirass**: This cuirass is made of lacquered leather
plates bound together and fitted over a silk shirt. It is
sometimes worn alone, especially during ceremonial occasions when
wearing other armor is frowned upon.

**Leather Lamellar Torso Armor Piece**: This shirt or cuirass is
constructed of a number of discrete hard-boiled leather plates
laced together in parallel rows.

**Leather Torso Armor Piece**: This armor piece is a shirt or
jacket constructed of hard-boiled leather carefully sewn together
into one piece.

**Mountain Pattern Torso Armor Piece**: This armor piece is a
shirt of a number of interlocking steel pieces riveted onto cloth
or leather.

**O-Yoroi Torso Armor Piece**: This complicated and multipart
cuirass also includes a kabuto helmet and a ho-ate mask for
further protection.

**Padded Torso Armor Piece**: This shirt or jacket is made of
heavy or quilted cloth.

**Plate Torso Armor Piece**: This is a breastplate made of steel.
When worn in conjunction with other armors, it also includes a
helmet. When worn alone, it counts medium armor, acts as a
breastplate, and does not include a helmet.

**Quilted Cloth Torso Armor Piece**: This shirt or jacket is made
of heavy quilted cloth specially designed to trap arrows and
other ranged piercing weapons. When worn alone, or with only
other quilted cloth pieces, you gain DR 3/— against ranged
piercing weapons.

**Scale Torso Armor Piece**: This shirt or cuirass is made up of
dozens of small overlapping metal plates.

**Silken Ceremonial Armor**: Used primarily for ceremonial
displays and sometimes worn over heavy armor, these robes consist
of several layers of cloth over an outer layer of embroidered
silk further reinforced with leather studs. It can be worn over
other torso armor pieces, but does not grant any extra armor
bonus, and increases the weight and cost of such armor.

**Splint Torso Armor Piece**: This shirt or cuirass is
constructed of metal strips reinforced with chain mail.

**Steel Lamellar Torso Armor Piece**: This armor piece consists
of a shirt or cuirass of steel plates laced together in parallel
rows. A steel lamellar torso armor piece includes a helmet.

**Stone Coat**: This weighty cuirass consists of lamellar crafted
from alchemically treated stone. If worn with other armor pieces,
this torso armor piece gains no armor bonus from the other armor
pieces, and all of the added hindrances.

**Studded Leather Torso Armor Piece**: This shirt or jacket is
constructed of hard-boiled leather carefully sewn together and
reinforced with metal studs.

**Tatami-Do Torso Armor Piece**: A lighter version of a o-yoroi
torso armor piece, this piece is constructed of a lighter
lamellar shirt. It includes a collapsible kabuto helmet and an
armored hood.

**Wooden Torso Armor Piece**: This shirt or cuirass is
constructed of fire-treated wood sewn over leather.

## Wounds and Vigor 

Hit points are an abstraction. When a fighter gains a level, his
body does not suddenly become more resistant to damage. A sword's
strike does not suddenly do proportionately less damage. Rather,
hit points suggest that the fighter has undergone more training,
and while he may have improved his ability to deal with wounds to
a small degree, the hit points gained at higher levels reflect
less his capacity for physical punishment and more his skill at
avoiding hits, his ability to dodge and twist and turn. Each loss
of hit points, in this case, suggests that he is becoming
progressively less nimble over the course of combat—in other
words, that the decreasing hit points are a marker for his
*overall* endurance and condition. It's not quite as satisfying,
however, to roll a critical hit and then tell a player that his
opponent ducked out of the way, but that the sword's slash made
the enemy a little less lucky.

This variant system for tracking wounds and vigor should help to
remedy that. As with the other systems in this chapter, this
system is entirely optional.

## Determining Wound Points and Vigor Points

Instead of hit points, creatures using this system have a number
of wound points and vigor points. These two replacement scores
are kept track of separately, and represent different ways a
character handles the damage inflicted on him. The following are
descriptions of these scores and how they work within the variant
system of damage tracking.

### Wound Points

Typically a creature has a number of wound points equal to twice
its Constitution score. It also has a wound threshold equal to
its Constitution score.

Wound points represent the amount of physical punishment a
creature can take before it dies. When a creature's wound points
drop to or below its wound threshold, that creature becomes
wounded. When a creature is wounded, it gains the staggered
condition until it is no longer wounded. Furthermore, when a
creature is wounded, if that creature takes any standard or move
action on its turn, its remaining wound points are reduced by 1
and it must make a DC 10 Constitution check. If the creature
fails that check, it falls unconscious.

When a creature reaches 0 or fewer wound points, it is dead.

**Wound Points and Constitution Damage, Drain, and Penalties**: A
creature's wound points and Constitution score are intrinsically
linked. For each point of Constitution damage a creature takes,
it loses 2 wound points, but this damage does not affect the
creature's wound threshold. When a creature takes a penalty to
its Constitution score or its Constitution is drained, it loses 1
wound point per point of drain or per penalty for the duration of
the penalty or drain. A penalty to Constitution or Constitution
drain has no effect on the creature's wound threshold.

### Vigor Points

Vigor represents a creature's ability to avoid the majority of
actual physical damage it might take from an attack. When a
creature takes damage, the damage typically reduces its vigor
points first. Some special attacks either deal wound point damage
directly or deal both vigor and wound point damage (see Critical
Hits).

Creatures with one or more full Hit Dice or levels gain vigor
points. With each level gained or each Hit Die a creature has, it
gains a number of vigor points based on its Hit Die type. Use the
creature's Hit Dice to generate its vigor points, just like you
would hit points, but without adding the creature's Constitution
modifier. A creature gains maximum vigor points on its first Hit
Die if it comes from a character class level. Creatures whose
first full Hit Die comes from an NPC class or from their race
roll their Hit Dice to determine their starting vigor points. A
creature with less than one Hit Die has no vigor points; it only
has wound points.

When a creature no longer has any vigor points, any additional
damage it takes reduces its wound point total.

## Regaining Wound Points and Vigor Points

A creature can regain wound and vigor points in a number of ways,
but in general it is easier to regain vigor points.

**Healing Spells and Effects**: When casting healing spells or
using an ability with a healing effect (such as channeling holy
energy on living creatures or the paladin's lay on hands
ability), the creature casting the spell or using the effect must
choose whether it wants to heal wound points or vigor points. The
creature decides this before casting the spell or using the
ability. When that creature decides to heal vigor points, the
healing spell or effect acts normally, replenishing a number of
vigor points equal to the number of hit points the spell or
effect would normally heal. If the creature decides to heal wound
points, it heals a number of wound points equal to the number of
dice it would normally roll for the healing spell or effect. In
the case of effects like the *[heal]* spell, where a spell or
effect heals 10 hit points per caster level, the creature heals
its caster level in wound points.

For instance, if a 12th-level cleric uses her channel positive
energy power to replenish wound points to living creatures, she
would typically heal 6 wound points for all living creatures with
her channel energy burst. If she casts the *[heal]* spell, she
would restore 12 wound points to the creature touched.

**Rest**: When a creature has a full night's rest (8 hours of
sleep or more), that creature regains all its vigor points and 1
wound point. If there is a significant interruption during a
rest, the creature regains neither wound points nor vigor points.
If a creature undergoes complete bed rest for an entire day, it
regains half its level in wound points and all its vigor points.

**Restoration and Similar Effects**: When a creature regains
Constitution points by way of the *[restoration]* spell or a
similar effect, that creature regains 2 wound points for every
Constitution point regained. Relieving a Constitution penalty or
Constitution drain regains any wound points that were lost from
that penalty or drain.

## Attacks that Deal Wound point Damage

Some attacks can be used to deal wound points damage directly.

**Critical Hits**: When a creature is subject to a critical hit,
the critical hit deals the damage normally, reducing vigor points
first, and then reducing wound points when vigor points are gone.
It also deals an amount of wound point damage equal to its
critical multiplier (for example, 3 wound points for a weapon
with a ×3 modifier), on top of any wound point damage the
creature might take from the critical hit.

**Negative Energy Damage**: When a creature deals negative energy
damage to a creature with a spell or effect, it can choose to
deal wound point or vigor point damage (but not both) with the
spell or effect. If that creature chooses to deal vigor point
damage, the spell or effect deals negative energy damage
normally, and that damage reduces vigor points only, even if it
deals more damage than the target has vigor points. If the spell
or effect deals negative energy damage to wound points directly,
it deals an amount of wound point damage equal to the number of
dice the creature would roll for that effect; if the effect deals
a number of points per caster level (such as the *[harm]* spell),
it deals a number of wound points equal to the caster level of
the spell.

## Other Considerations

The following are a few other considerations to take into account
when using the wounds and vigor system.

**Temporary Hit Points**: When a creature would normally gain
temporary hit points, it gains temporary vigor points instead.
When that creature takes damage, it loses these temporary vigor
points first. If an attack deals damage to wound points only,
these temporary vigor points are not lost.

**Nonlethal Damage**: When a creature takes nonlethal damage, it
takes that damage in vigor points only, even if the attack deals
more damage than the creature has vigor points. If the creature
has no vigor points (and no temporary vigor points), each time
that creature takes damage from an attack that deals nonlethal
damage, it takes either 1 wound point of damage, or a number of
wound points in damage equal to the attack's critical hit
modifier if the attack is a critical hit.

**Spells or Effects with Hit Point Triggers**: When using this
system, if a spell or an ability has an effect that occurs when
you reduce a creature to 0 or fewer hit points (such as the
*[disintegrate]*spell), that effect is instead triggered when a
creature is wounded. In the case of the *[harm]* spell or a
similar effect where a creature cannot be reduced below 1 hit
point by the spell or effect, a creature's wound points cannot be
reduced to or below that creature's wound threshold.

## Wounds and Vigor Variant Feats

The following feats are either new for the wounds and vigor
system or work differently in that system.

### Deathless Initiate }

For you, impending death is a call to wrath.

**Prerequisites**: Str 13, Con 13, [Diehard], [Endurance], base
attack bonus +6, orc or half-orc.

**Benefit**: You are not staggered when your wound points reach
your wound threshold, but you lose 1 wound point if you take any
action during your turn. You only take 1 wound point each round
when you take actions. Furthermore, you gain a +2 bonus on melee
attacks and damage rolls when your wound points are at or below
your wound threshold.

### Deathless Master }

Even if you suffer a grievous wound, you can shrug off the damage
and continue your relentless assault.

**Prerequisites**: Str 13, Con 15, [Deathless Initiate]),
[Diehard], [Endurance], [Ironhide], base attack bonus +9, orc or
half-orc.

**Benefit**: When your wound points reach your wound threshold,
you do not take 1 wound point when you take an action.

### Diehard

You keep on going, even when your wound points are lower than
your wound threshold.

**Benefit**: When your current wound point total is below your
wound threshold, you do not need to succeed at the DC 10
Constitution check to stay conscious.

### Toughness

You have enhanced physical stamina.

**Benefit**: You gain 1 wound point for every level or Hit Die
your character has.
